
===== PAGE 1 =====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 41, NO. 4, JUL Y 2026 2547
Analytical Models of Frequency and V oltage in
Large-Scale All-Inverter Power Systems
Marena Trujillo , Graduate Student Member , IEEE,A m i rS a j a d i, Senior Member , IEEE, Jonathan Shaw ,
and Bri-Mathias Hodge , Senior Member , IEEE
Abstract—Low-order frequency response models for power sys-
tems have a decades-long history in optimization and control prob-
lems such as unit commitment, economic dispatch, and wide-area
control. With a few exceptions, these models are built upon the
Newtonian mechanics of synchronous generators, assuming that
the frequency dynamics across a system are approximately ho-
mogeneous, and assume the dynamics of nodal voltages for most
operating conditions are negligible, and thus are not directly com-
puted at all buses. As a result, the use of system frequency models
results in the systematic underestimation of frequency minimum
nadir and maximum RoCoF, and provides no insight into the
reactive power-voltage dynamics. This paper proposes a low-order
model of both frequency and voltage response in grid-forming
inverter-dominated power systems. The proposed model accounts
for spatial-temporal variations in frequency and voltage behavior
across a system and as a result, demonstrates the heterogeneity
of frequency response in future renewable power systems. Elec-
tromagnetic transient (EMT) simulations are used to validate the
utility, accuracy, and computational efﬁciency of these models,
setting the basis for them to serve as fast, scalable alternatives
to EMT simulation, especially when dealing with very large-scale
systems, for both planning and operational studies.
Received 17 January 2025; revised 6 June 2025 and 1 October 2025; ac-
cepted 20 December 2025. Date of publication 5 January 2026; date of current
version 22 June 2026. This work was supported in part by the National Science
Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant DGE 2040434, in part
by the National Science Foundation’s Advancing Sustainability through Power
Infrastructure for Roadway Electriﬁcation (ASPIRE) Engineering Research
Center and National Science Foundation, United States, under Award 1941524,
and in part by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory through the Alliance
for Sustainable Energy, LLC, for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), under
Contract DE-AC36-08GO28308. Paper no. TPWRS-00106-2025.(Correspond-
ing author: Marena Trujillo.)
Marena Trujillo is with the Department of Electrical, Computer, and Energy
Engineering, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309 USA, also
with the Renewable and Sustainable Energy Institute, University of Colorado
Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309 USA, and also with National Renewable Energy
Laboratory, Golden, CO 80401 USA (e-mail: marena.trujillo@colorado.edu).
Amir Sajadi is with the Renewable and Sustainable Energy Institute, Uni-
versity of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309 USA, and also with the
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO 80401 USA (e-mail:
amir.sajadi@colorado.edu).
Jonathan Shaw is with the Department of Applied Mathematics,
University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309 USA (e-mail:
jonathan.shaw@colorado.edu).
Bri-Mathias Hodge is with the Department of Electrical, Computer, and
Energy Engineering, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309
USA, also with the Renewable and Sustainable Energy Institute, University of
Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309 USA, also with the National Renewable
Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO 80401 USA, and also with the Department
of Applied Mathematics, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309
USA (e-mail: brimathias.hodge@colorado.edu).
This article has supplementary material provided by the au-
thors and color versions of one or more ﬁgures available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPWRS.2025.3650698.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TPWRS.2025.3650698
Index Terms —Frequency response, all-inverter systems, low-
inertia systems, grid-forming inverters, voltage dynamics.
A
S THE climate crisis drives extreme temperature changes,
intensifying storms, and habitat destruction, the need for
decarbonization is more urgent than ever. As a result, the
adoption of wind, solar, and battery storage devices, which are
power electronics-interfaced resources, continues to increase
worldwide [1]. However, the physical principals determining
the behavior of inverter-based resources (IBRs) are fundamen-
tally different from that of conventional, synchronous machine-
interfaced resources. As IBRs supplant synchronous generators
(SGs), the dominant system dynamics shift from electromechan-
ical modes to electromagnetic modes [2]. Thus, this transition
from SGs to IBRs warrants new analytical models to best explain
the underlying physical phenomena consistent with the nature
of emerging power systems.
Analytical models are the building blocks of algorithms and
the core engines behind all existing scientiﬁc and commercial
simulation tools used in research and industry to predict the
system behavior. However, there is always a trade-off between
the granularity of results vs. the scale of system that can be
simulated with reasonable computational effort. A review of
the literature suggests that two general directions have emerged
in modeling the dynamics of power systems. The ﬁrst direction
focuses on different formulations, such as sinusoid waveform vs.
phasor models. Sinusoid waveform models provide high-ﬁdelity
simulations of power systems by explicitly modeling all three
phases and controllers, supporting the use of high-order, highly
detailed device models, and having time step capabilities in the
microsecond range [2]. However, solving waveform models,
which is the engine in software packages such as Power System
Computer Aided Design (PSCAD), remains impractical for use
in large-scale systems due to their computational burden [2].
Alternatively, the use of phasor models, which are reduced-
order models, utilize simpliﬁed device and network models and
consequently their computational tractability is far superior to
waveform models. However, while phasor models are attractive
due to their computational tractability, they are less accurate
than full-order models [2]. Positive sequence RMS (Root Mean
Square) simulation tools, such as Power Systems Simulator for
Engineers (PSSE) and PowerWorld, are examples of reduced-
order models in the sense that they reduce a three-phase explicit
model to a positive sequence model. However, these tools, which
were developed based on the slow electromechanical dynamics
of SGs are ill suited for modeling IBRs due to their large time
0885-8950 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artiﬁcial intelligence and similar technologi es.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index. html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:48:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 2 =====
2548 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 41, NO. 4, JUL Y 2026
steps (about 4 ms), and inability to model internal controllers[3].
While both the full-order models in EMT tools and the reduced-
order models in positive sequence tools have clear shortcomings,
there are also other methods of model reduction.
Order reduction can be achieved by eliminating non-dominant
modes in the dynamics of variables of interest, and can be
performed through various techniques, e.g., perturbation the-
ory [4], integral manifolds [5], or simply through simpliﬁed
physics-based reduction methods [6]. Almost universally, ex-
isting analytically reduced models for power systems are fo-
cused on system frequency (SFR) models, while developing
such models for nodal voltage dynamics has not been a focus
of the literature [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14].
SFR models that aggregate the primary frequency response of
a system take the order-reduction process to an extreme by
omitting network effects and neglecting all variance in frequency
response across a system [7]. SFR models have been widely
used as a less computationally burdensome alternative to time
domain simulation for the estimation of the frequency response
of a system after a disturbance [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12],
[13], [14]. They yield reasonable approximations of RoCoF and
nadir frequency for SGs, which can then be formulated into con-
straints on frequency stability or under-frequency load-shedding
in power systems optimization problems [8], [9].I n [6] and [7],
lower-order SFR models are presented, but the SGs exhibit
little heterogeneity in terms of governor and prime mover type.
These models were intended to provide general information
about a system’s frequency response post-disturbance [7], and
to formulate margins that would ensure the minimum frequency
following a disturbance would not be less than the load-shedding
frequency threshold [6]. An open-loop model to calculate the
maximum frequency deviation in a small isolated power system
is proposed in [10]. This model allows for SGs with different
governor, prime mover, and turbine characteristics, unlike the
SFR model of [7].I n [11], a parabolic frequency deviation
serves as the input to an open-loop SFR model to better predict
system nadir. However, all of these models presume a SG-
dominated system and most neglect the network dynamics and
the spatial-temporal characteristics of frequency response. In all
cases, reactive-power/voltage (Q-V) dynamics are completely
disregarded.
IBR-rich systems typically feature power electronic devices
with two prominent inverter control paradigms: grid-following
inverters (GFLs) or grid-forming inverters (GFMs). Both de-
vices provide power, but only GFMs construct frequency and
regulate voltage independently. GFLs with grid support func-
tionality, i.e. volt-var and volt-watt functions, can also manip-
ulate frequency and voltage response through the regulation
of active and reactive power, but they required a well-deﬁned
voltage waveform at their point of interconnection and they
cannot independently form frequency [15]. For these reasons,
we focus on GFMs in this work. With regards to the frequency
response of inverters, the SFR model of[12] is intended to model
systems with some amount of renewable generation, though all
renewable generators are modeled as doubly fed induction gen-
erators with droop control. In [13], a nadir prediction model is
proposed that accounts for three different types of fast frequency
response provided by IBRs. However, the authors neglect the
fast dynamics of IBRs and do not distinguish between GFL and
GFM. The model in [14] omits inverter dynamics but makes
the unique contribution of providing a closed-form solution
of frequency response for a three SG system. In this work, a
simpliﬁed network model is used to account for inter-machine
frequency oscillations. However, application of [14] to large,
multi-generator systems requires the aggregation of generators
into three equivalent SGs. Importantly, the model presumes
a ﬂat voltage proﬁle of 1 pu across the system. The review
of the literature on voltage models also reveals that existing
reduced order models of GFM networks that account for voltage
dynamics require the division of a network into an aggregated
“external area” and a “study area” [16] and require the inclusion
of currents as state variables[17]. Additionally, to the best of our
knowledge, no low-order model exists to speciﬁcally compute
nodal voltage and frequency for all GFM nodes in large-scale
power systems.
This work advances the ﬁeld by using physics-based reduction
methods to develop low-order, accurate models for frequency
and voltage dynamics in all-inverter systems. GFM devices are
modeled explicitly, while GFL inverters are modeled as negative
load. The models are accurate and scalable, effectively eliminat-
ing the need for EMT simulations for a variety of applications.
To this end, we ﬁrst demonstrate the critical role of reactive
power losses post-disturbance and its effect on voltage response
and present novel methods for calculating post-disturbance re-
active power participation factors for each GFM in a system.
We then derive our proposed analytical models for frequency
and voltage response for all-inverter systems. We utilize matrix
exponentials to dramatically accelerate computation time. Using
EMT simulation, we demonstrate the signiﬁcant advantages
that our models present with regards to solution speed and
scalability, while preserving high accuracy. For these reasons,
the models lend themselves well to direct application within
industry and research environments. The ability to accurately
and efﬁciently simulate transients in all-inverter systems sets
the basis for probabilistic analysis of frequency and voltage
stability as well as security-constrained economic dispatch and
real-time dynamic security assessment, among other potential
future applications.
I. T
HE NEED FOR NEW ANALYTICAL MODELS
In this section, we argue that the need for new analytical
models of system dynamics is threefold. First, existing frequency
response models are for 100% SG systems, or systems that are
dominated by SGs, and are therefore intrinsically inappropriate
for modeling all-inverter systems. Secondly, existing system
frequency models neglect the heterogeneity of frequency re-
sponse and the impacts of the transmission network, which
we will demonstrate is particularly unsuitable for low-inertia,
all-inverter systems. Finally, while existing models capture P-
δdynamics reasonably well, they assume Q- δdynamics are
insigniﬁcant, and as a result, voltage proﬁles are assumed to
be 1 pu, which is only realistic for a network with large SGs.
Hence, there is need for an analytical model that reﬂect this
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:48:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 3 =====
TRUJILLO et al.: ANAL YTICAL MODELS OF FREQUENCY AND VOLTAGE IN LARGE-SCALE ALL-INVERTER POWER SYSTEMS 2549
Fig. 1. Frequency response block diagram and response shape for: 1) SGs
(left) and 2) GFMs (right) [23].
non-negligible coupling between active power and voltage, es-
pecially in all-inverter systems where these dynamics are even
more critical [18]. In what follows, we discuss each of the
above-mentioned issues in detail and present evidence in support
of our arguments.
A. Frequency Response: SG Vs. GFM
The frequency response of all inverter systems is markedly
different from that of conventional systems, where SGs provide
frequency response. This difference arises from the fundamen-
tally different way power and frequency are generated by GFMs
vs. SGs. The frequency dynamics in SGs are initially governed
by the mechanical momentum of the turbine, which determines
the rate at which frequency deviates. This “inertial phase” is
followed by primary frequency control, where the action of the
turbine governor changes the generator’s active power output to
arrest the frequency deviation [19]. The rate of change of fre-
quency is entirely dependent on the generator momentum [18],
commonly expressed in seconds and referred to as the inertia
constant. In primary frequency control, active power output
changes as a function of the speed-droop coefﬁcient, which is
typically 5% [19]. Accordingly, the amount of momentum in
the system and the governor response of the online generators
collectively determine the frequency nadir, which is the point on
the frequency response curve where frequency is lowest [11].
The frequency response mechanism of a generic SG is shown in
Fig. 1.
While Newtonian physics guides frequency deviations in
SGs, forming a second-order dynamical system, the frequency
response of inverters is purely a function of their control algo-
rithms; thus, as shown in [20], it presents a ﬁrst-order dynam-
ical system on the same timescales. There are three prominent
control regimes for GFMs including linear droop, virtual syn-
chronous machines, and virtual oscillator control [20].I nt h i s
paper, we focus on multi-loop droop-control GFM (Fig. 1), due
to their popularity and markedly different response shape as
compared to SGs. In a droop control GFM, frequency is adjusted
according to the device’s droop gain constant, which can be
changed and is not intrinsic to the device [20]. Due to their very
small inertia constant, lower nadirs are often observed in power
systems with high shares of inverters [15], which is undesirable
due to the legacy protection systems [21]. High RoCoF and low
nadir values could unintentionally activate protection mecha-
nisms, resulting in load-shedding. This was exactly the case in
Fig. 2. PowerWorld simulation results of the WECC system following the
outage of the Palo V erde Nuclear Generating Station, the system dimensioning
contingency.
Britain on August 9th, 2019, when the Low Frequency Demand
Disconnection (LFDD) protection mechanism was activated,
tripping off massive amounts of distributed generation [22].
Therefore, it is important to develop computationally efﬁcient
analytical models that adequately capture frequency response in
large systems with high shares of GFMs.
B. Network Frequency Heterogeneity
Many system frequency models are founded upon the op-
erating principles of SGs and on the assumption of frequency
being homogeneous across the network. Under this assumption,
a system frequency model can be formulated by conveniently
aggregating the parameters of SGs and modeling them as a
single representative generator [6]. In such a model, there is
no need to model how the generators in the system synchro-
nize with each other and the impact of network topology is
neglected. In reality, frequency is not homogeneous across a
power network. Rather, disturbance propagation – and therefore
frequency response – is closely related to network topology.
More speciﬁcally, disturbances are more severe in areas sup-
porting the Fiedler eigenvalue of the network Laplacian [24].
Therefore, by aggregating generator parameters to approximate
a “system frequency response,” one is ignoring the impact of
network connectivity and systematically underestimating the
maximum RoCoF and frequency deviation. To illustrate this
effect, we simulate the outage of the Palo V erde Nuclear Gener-
ating Station in the WECC system, and the results are provided in
Fig. 2.
In Fig.2, it is evident that even in this primarily SG network the
frequency dynamics are not homogeneous, with varying values
of RoCoF and nadir in each region. This suggests that neglecting
the spatial-temporal characteristics of frequency response in a
system yields inaccurate estimations of key metrics, particularly
for large systems. Heterogeneity in frequency response could
be exacerbated by higher shares of IBRs and a lack of inertia,
leading to the simultaneous occurrence of frequency, voltage,
and network dynamics [18]. Additionally, there is clearly a
time delay between when signiﬁcant deviation from nominal
frequency begins to occur in the southern region versus in the
northern region. Time delays between frequency response trajec-
tories is another example of detail that is lost when representing
the frequency response of a system with a single trajectory.
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:48:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 4 =====
2550 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 41, NO. 4, JUL Y 2026
C. V oltage Response and Reactive Power Flow
While active power is the part of apparent power that does the
work, reactive power is vitally important for preventing the de-
magnetization of transmission lines and sustaining voltages dur-
ing transients [18]. Without adequate reactive power provision,
low voltages may occur and contribute to a blackout [25].T h e
changing nature of frequency in IBR-dominated power systems
also has ramiﬁcations in terms of voltage dynamics. While active
and reactive power are closely related, frequency and voltage
are treated independently in the conventional wisdom of power
system analysis [19]. This is because in a conventional power
system dominated by SGs, automatic voltage regulators (A VRs)
locally control the terminal voltage of SGs by adjustment of their
ﬁeld currents [19]. Because A VR dynamics are electromagnetic
in nature, voltage regulation happens at a much faster timescale
than frequency response, which is an electromechanical pro-
cess in a SG dominated environment. Therefore, frequency and
voltage dynamics are evaluated separately [18]. Due to the
long-standing and ubiquitous treatment of voltage and frequency
as decoupled, knowledge about the limits of the validity of the
decoupling approach is lacking. At the same time, there is more
need than ever to build upon our understanding of P-V and Q- δ
dynamics due to new challenges posed by the introduction of
IBRs. Unlike SGs, where frequency and voltage dynamics occur
on different timescales, the frequency and voltage response of
IBRs are both electromagnetic in nature [26]. The contempora-
neousness of these dynamics may result in unexpected coupling
dynamics and may lead to instabilities and low security [26].
Also distinguishing IBR dynamics from SG dynamics are con-
straints related to the silicon-based switches of power electron-
ics. To avoid damaging these switches, IBRs limit their active
and reactive power injections, whereas the power output of SGs
is not bounded to the same degree; they can temporarily deviate
from the excitation setpoint and supply a transient response
which greatly exceeds the nominal rating of the machine[27].I n
other words, while SGs are capable of providing generous active
and reactive power during transients to support voltage and fre-
quency, IBRs must more carefully provide power as to not violate
current limits. As a result, the active and reactive power outputs
of an IBR are closely related [18]. Here, we demonstrate the in-
creased coupling in emergent power networks with all GFMs and
the need to include both active and reactive power distribution
factors.
Estimating Q-V dynamics post-disturbance is difﬁcult due to
the nonlinear nature of reactive power ﬂow [28]. Interestingly,
active power participation factors can still be reasonably esti-
mated while neglecting Q-V dynamics, and [6], [7], [8], [9],
[10], [11], [12], [13], [14] leverage this fact. To demonstrate this
point, we simulate two different load steps in the WSCC 9-bus
system, depicted in Fig. 3, and calculate the active and reactive
power participation factors of each generator. The system has 3
GFM inverters and 3 constant power loads. Assuming generators
have adequate headroom, we assert that the active and reactive
participation factors of each generator can be estimated by
solving the nonlinear power ﬂow equations following a distur-
bance. The participation factors are equal to the change in power
Fig. 3. One-line diagram of the WSCC 9-bus system.
TABLE I
PERCENT DIFFERENCE CHANGE IN ACTIVE POWER INJECTION AT GENERA TION
BUSES, ΔPG,B ETWEEN:1 ) AN ACTIVE POWER LOAD STEP,2 ) AN ACTIVE
AND REACTIVE POWER LOAD STEP
TABLE II
PERCENT DIFFERENCE IN REACTIVE POWER INJECTION AT GENERA TION
BUSES,ΔQG,A FTER COMPLEX LOAD STEPS WITH INCREASING ACTIVE
POWER DISTURBANCE MAGNITUDES
injection pre- and post-disturbance at each generation node. The
calculation differs from the standard AC power ﬂow because,
instead of buses being categorized as Vθ(slack), PV , and PQ
types, they are only Vθand PQ type. Buses with GFMs are
treated as Vθbuses immediately after a disturbance and before
the inverter controls have time to adjust their voltage angle and
magnitude setpoints in response to changes in tie-in active and
reactive power.
First, an active power load step of 31.5 MW is applied to Bus
6 and the active power participation factors are calculated. Then,
a load step of 31.5 MW plus 9 MV ar was applied to Bus 6, and
again the active power participation factors are calculated. Note
that 31.5 MW is 10% of the active power load and 9 MV ar is
10% of the reactive power load. The results, which are shown in
Table I, indicate that even when a 10% reactive power load step
is applied, the active power participation factors do not differ
greatly.
The picture is very different for changes in reactive power
injection following a complex power disturbance. In Table II
the results of participation factor calculations following seven
disturbances are shown. In each of these simulations, a reactive
power disturbance of 9 MV AR was applied to Bus 6. An active
power step ranging from 0 MW to 30 MW was also applied
in each simulation. The baseline ΔQ
G values were calculated
f o l l o w i n ga9M V A Rl o a ds t e p .E v e nthough the magnitude of the
reactive power load step was the same for each simulation, the
reactive power injection at each generation node increases with
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:48:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 5 =====
TRUJILLO et al.: ANAL YTICAL MODELS OF FREQUENCY AND VOLTAGE IN LARGE-SCALE ALL-INVERTER POWER SYSTEMS 2551
Fig. 4. Sending-end reactive power with respect to δSR and receiving-end
voltage.VS =1 .0 andX =0 .05.
the magnitude of the active power disturbance. For example,
ΔQG at Bus 1 was 12.13% greater than the baseline value
following the addition of a 5 MW load step. To explain this
behavior, recall the equation for reactive power at the sending
end of a transmission line (1) [19].
QS = ℑ{VSI∗
S}≈ VS
X (VS −VR cosδSR) (1)
Usually,δSR is assumed to be small and cosδSR ≈1.T h i s
yields the trace corresponding toδ=0 ◦in Fig. 4(a) [19], which
is shown as a dashed line. After a disturbance, however, the
angle across a transmission line δSR may increase, impacting
reactive power injections across the system. If we choose not to
approximate cosδSR ≈1, we have a more complete picture of
reactive power dynamics, as shown in Fig. 4. From this ﬁgure,
we see there is signiﬁcant curvature along the δSR axis, which
illustrates there is a non-negligible relationship between voltage
angle and reactive power. While Q- δcoupling is ignored in
some studies [29], other works have attempted to account for
this behavior. In [30] and [31],Q -δdynamics are acknowl-
edged but it is assumed that the slack bus alone changes its
power injection to account for generation/load active power
imbalances. In reality, all online generators will respond to
the changes in states seen at their point of interconnection and
therefore this assumption should not be made when attempting
to estimate post-disturbance reactive power ﬂow. In this paper,
we improve upon previous efforts to estimate post-disturbance
reactive power injections by distributing increased active power
imbalances more realistically.
In summary, we established that the frequency transients
across a power network could vary signiﬁcantly due to indi-
vidual generator properties, the fast nature of IBR frequency
response mechanisms, and the impact of the transmission net-
work. This frequency heterogeneity is especially pronounced
in power networks with high shares of inverters. Moreover, to
the author’s knowledge, no low-order voltage response model
has been developed for either SG-dominated or IBR-dominated
systems. This constitutes a massive gap in our ability to estimate
post-disturbance dynamics. There is an even greater need for
models of Q-V dynamics post-disturbance seeing that the in-
creased deployment of IBRs can give rise to weak grid conditions
and compromise voltage stability[32]. These gaps in knowledge
serve as the motivation to develop our frequency and voltage
models for all-inverter systems, which will be discussed in the
next section.
II. P
ROPOSED MODELS
In Section I-C we demonstrate howQ-V dynamics have a lim-
ited effect on active power participation factors and frequency.
Conversely, changes in voltage angle have a non-negligible
effect on the reactive power participation of each generator.
Therefore, one can estimate frequency well without accounting
for reactive power, but cannot estimate reactive power well
without accounting for changes in phase angle. Given this infor-
mation, we propose a frequency response model for all-inverter
power systems that assumes decoupled dynamics, and a voltage
response model that accounts for Q- δdynamics. These models
can be solved independently.
A. Frequency Response Model
The reduced-order block diagram representing the frequency
response of a multi-loop droop GFM is shown in Fig. 1.T h e
power error is detected through a low pass ﬁlter, creating a power
error signal. This error signal serves as the input to the droop
controller [23].T
c is the reciprocal of the cut-off frequency in Hz
andR is the droop gain. The corresponding linearized dynamics
for the ith machine are given by system (2):
{
Δ˙δi = ω0Δωi,
Δ˙ωi = 1
Tci
(αiRiΔPei −Δωi), (2)
whereδi is the voltage angle,ωi is the frequency, andω0 =2 πf0,
where f0 is the nominal network frequency, e.g. 60 Hz in the
United States. The parameter αi is equal to the system base
divided by
Real and reactive nodal power injections are nonlinear func-
tions of voltage magnitude and angle. These functions are typ-
ically linearized around a particular operating point [19].O u r
frequency response model utilizes DC power ﬂow approxima-
tions. In the DC formulation, reactive power ﬂow is disregarded
because it is smaller than active power ﬂow. The resulting
linearized equation for power is (3), which can be written in
terms of power injections at generation and load nodes as seen in
(4). Grid-following inverters without grid support functionality
may be treated as load nodes.
ΔP = BΔδ (3)
[
ΔP
G
ΔPL
]
=
[
BGG BGL
BLG BLL
][
ΔδG
ΔδL
]
(4)
The network is topologically reduced through the elimination of
non-generator nodes [19], as follows:
ΔPG = BrΔδG  
ΔPos
+ BLΔPL  
ΔPd
(5)
where Br = BGG −BGLB−1
LLBLG and BL = BGLB−1
LL.
From (5) we see that the change in power at a generation node
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:48:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 6 =====
2552 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 41, NO. 4, JUL Y 2026
is a function of the differences in angles between generation
nodes and the change in power injections at the non-generator
nodes [14]. We refer to the ﬁrst term of (5) as the inter-machine
oscillation of power. The second term, which is denoted asΔPd
is interpreted as the change in power injections at generation
nodes due to a disturbance. ΔPd is a vector with a number of
elements equal to the number of generators. ΔPL is the vector
of load changes. For instance, consider a system with three load
buses and a load step at load bus 3. The third element of ΔPL
is then Pstep ∗Kl, where Kl is the approximated marginal loss
constant. Average transmission and distribution losses are about
2-5%, and therefore we recommend choosing 1.05 as the value
ofK
l to avoid overestimating nadir and settling frequency [33].
The approximation of a linear relationship between active power
transfer and line losses is consistent with the concept of marginal
loss factors [34]. The higher the value of K
l, the more conser-
vative the estimate of nadir and settling frequency. It should be
noted that non-generator nodes are assumed to be static and,
therefore, this model is limited in capturing load dynamics. The
modeling of dynamic loads, including grid-following inverters
with frequency support functionality, necessitates the preser-
vation of the relevant nodes during Kron reduction which are
not considered in this work. For a system with n droop control
GFMs, we deﬁne
Δδ≜ [Δδ
1,n ... Δδn−1,n]T (6)
Δω≜ [Δω1 ... Δωn]T (7)
where Δδi,n denotes the relative voltage angle Δδi −Δδn.
Relative voltage angles are used so that synchronizing dynamics
may be represented [19]. Then, the system-wide dynamics are
given by the (2n−1)-dimensional system of ODEs in (8).
d
dt
[
Δδ
Δω
]
= Af
[
Δδ
Δω
]
+ BfΔPd, (8)
where
Af =
[ 0 ω01−1
˜B T
]
and Bf =
[0
γ
]
(9)
with
1−1 =
⎡
⎢⎢
⎢⎢⎣
10 ... 0 −1
01 ... 0 −1
..
.
..
. . . . ..
.
..
.
00 ... 1 −1
⎤
⎥⎥
⎥⎥⎦
∈R
(n−1)×n, (10)
˜B = −diag
(αiRi
Tci
)
˜Br, T = −diag
( 1
Tci
)
, (11)
and
γ = diag
(αiRi
Tci
)
. (12)
˜Br denotes the matrix Br with thenth column removed. We re-
fer to the proposed frequency response model as the Low-Inertia
Frequency Evolution (LIFE) model. The model is intended for
modeling the dynamic behavior of a system following a small to
Fig. 5. Low-order model of reactive droop.
moderate power imbalance. Scenarios where very large voltage
angle differences across transmission lines ( > 30
◦) are seen or
where large changes in voltage magnitude are observed, i.e.
during faults and restoration processes, are not captured by the
model.
B. V oltage Response Model
The LIFE model made the standard assumption of decoupled
active and reactive power ﬂow. Here, we propose a model of
voltage response that accounts for post-disturbance Q- δcou-
pling and can be thought of as the counterpart of our frequency
response model. The reduced-order block diagram representing
the reactive power droop of a multi-loop GFM is given in Fig. 5.
A detailed discussion on the validity of this model and on
determining an appropriate time constant, Tq , is included in the
companion Supplemental Note of this paper. Rq is the reactive
power droop value.
Given that reactive power cannot travel long distances and
voltage magnitudes do not synchronize across a network, the
open loop model of Fig. 5 is a reasonable method for estimating
voltage response locally [19]. The model must be provided with
a good approximation of the change in reactive power injection
at the generator nodes, ΔQ
G. The equation for instantaneous
reactive power injection is (13).
Qi = −
n∑
j=1
BijViVj cosθij +
n∑
j=1
GijViVj sinθij (13)
Assuming the reactive power set points of all GFMs are known,
the change in reactive power injection due to the disturbance can
be described as (14).
ΔQG = QG(Vpost,θpost)−QG0 (14)
where Vpost and θpost are the post-disturbance angles and volt-
ages, and QG0 is the inverter Q set point. We propose the
following steps for estimating QG(Vpost,θpost) andΔQG.
1) Estimate each new GFM active power injection using
PGi(Vpost,θpost) ≈ΔPdi +PGi0 where ΔPdi is calcu-
lated in (5).
2) In the AC power ﬂow formulation, update the active power
injections to reﬂect PGi(Vpost,θpost), ΔPL, and ΔQL.
Then solve AC power ﬂow.
3) The updated Q values are approximately equal to
QG(Vpost,θpost).
4) Approximate ΔQG using (14).
The difference between solving for QG(Vpost,θpost) as de-
scribed in Section I-C and in the process enumerated above
boils down to the assumed known quantities at each generator
bus. In a classic AC power ﬂow problem, P and V are the
known quantities at the generation buses, while in the proposed
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:48:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 7 =====
TRUJILLO et al.: ANAL YTICAL MODELS OF FREQUENCY AND VOLTAGE IN LARGE-SCALE ALL-INVERTER POWER SYSTEMS 2553
TABLE III
VALIDA TION OFPROPOSED REACTIVE POWER INJECTION
APPROXIMA TIONMETHOD
formulation of Section I-C, V and θare the known quantities.
However, since P and θare closely related, these approaches
yield nearly identical results, as shown in Table III. The beneﬁt
of using the process enumerated above is that it allows for the
leveraging of AC power ﬂow solvers, which are ubiquitous and
effective for large systems.
In a droop-controlled GFM, the quadrature-axis (q-axis) volt-
age is adjusted according to the droop value R
q and the change
in reactive power injection ΔQG [35]. This adjusted q-axis
voltage then passes through the voltage controller and current
controller before the q-axis and direct-axis (d-axis) voltages
are transformed into the phase voltages Va, Vb, and Vc via
the inverse Park Transformation. These voltages serve as the
inputs to the inverter LCL ﬁlter [35]. As a result, the change in
voltage magnitude at the generator bus is actually several times
larger thanΔV
G as calculated in (16). Therefore, to calculate the
exact change in voltage magnitude at the generator bus would
require modeling these additional controls and including the
q-axis and d-axis currents and voltages. This would increase the
number of states in the system several times over, which would
severely diminish the computational tractability of the voltage
response model for large systems and precisely the bottleneck
of the present day EMT simulation platforms, and thus deﬁes
the original purpose of reduced-order models. This address this
limitation, we propose the introduction of the voltage outer-
loop-to-grid constant,K
v , to maintain computational efﬁciency
of the voltage response model. This constant accounts for the
aggregation of all coefﬁcients involved, including the equivalent
gain factor between the droop-adjusted V
q and the post voltage
and current controllerVq , and in effect maps the dominant modes
that are excited in voltage transients. Depending on the speciﬁc
GFM inverter model, this constant may vary and the precise
value for a speciﬁc inverter should be determined by sensitivity
testing, either hardware testing in the laboratory environment or
system identiﬁcation analysis in the simulation environment, as
described in the companion Supplemental Note of this paper. In
our case, after extensive, computational experimentation with
industry-grade models for a range of disturbances, we deter-
mined values between 4 and 5 are most appropriate for the mod-
els used in [35]. Further information on the calculation of K
v
parameter and a discussion sensitivity testing and mathematical
analysis is offered in the Supplemental Note. The change in
voltage magnitude at a generator bus is approximated by (15),
where VG,grid is the voltage at the terminal of the GFM. We
subsequently refer to this model of voltage response, which is
given in state-space form in (16), as the Low-Inertia V oltage
Evolution (LIVE) model. In this formulation, Bv encodes the
settling voltage and Av encodes the pace at which the settling
voltage is reached. We note that the proposed voltage model
is not intended to simulate dynamics introduced by device
Fig. 6. Workﬂow for the LIFE and LIVE models. The disturbance magnitude
is embedded into ΔPd as indicated in (5).
malfunctions, i.e. forced oscillations [36], super-synchronous
events, or by AC faults.
ΔVG,grid ≈Kv ·ΔVG (15)
[
Δ| ˙VG,grid|
]
= Av
[
Δ|VG,grid|
]
+ Bv
[
ΔQG
]
(16)
where
Av = −diag
( 1
Tqi
)
, Bv = diag
(αiRqiKv
Tqi
)
(17)
III. A NALYTIC SOLUTIONS AND WORKFLOW
The proposed models give rise to initial value problems that
have analytic solutions; namely, both system (8) and (16) are of
the form
˙x(t)= Ax(t)+ Bu(t),x 0 = x(t0),u 0 = u(t0),
for constant matrices A and B and known forcing u(t).T h e
solution to such a system is given by
x(t)= eAtx0 +
∫ t
t0
eA(t−τ)Bu(τ)d τ
(see [37]). In both the LIFE and LIVE models, a zero initial
condition and constant forcing are assumed, so the solutions
simplify to
[
Δδ
Δω
]
(t)=
∫ t
t0
eAf(t−τ)BfΔPd dτ (LIFE model), (18)
Δ|VG,grid|(t)=
∫ t
t0
eAv(t−τ)BvΔQG dτ (LIVE model).
(19)
Moreover, the matrices Af and Av are diagonalizable, so the
solutions (18) and (19) can be computed exceptionally quickly.
The suggested workﬂow for the implementation of the LIFE
and LIVE models is shown in Fig. 6. The susceptance matrix,
B can be obtained from the MA TPOWER, PowerWorld, TSA T,
PSSE, or PSLF ﬁle of the relevant system for ofﬂine applications
(planning case) and directly exported from the state estimator
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:48:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 8 =====
2554 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 41, NO. 4, JUL Y 2026
Fig. 7. LIFE vs. PSCAD simulations in the 9-bus system.
TABLE IV
SIMULA TIONRUNTIME COMPARISON OF THE WSCC 9 BUS NETWORK
for online applications (operations case). The generator dis-
patches are determined by power ﬂow calculations if conducting
multi-scenario ofﬂine dynamics studies and directly by the state
estimator if conducting online dynamic assessment. Next, for a
given generator dispatch, A
f , Bf , Av , and Bv are calculated.
The exact analytical solution is computed using either (18) or
(19). These computations are exceptionally fast, making them
suitable to run on most commonly available computers for
operational applications, real-time contingency screening, or for
determining likely undesirable operating scenarios that may be
investigated further with EMT simulation.
IV . COMPUTER SIMULA TION AND VALIDA TION
We used the WSCC 9-bus system and IEEE 39-bus system
benchmarks to test and verify the accuracy of the frequency
response model given in (8) against industry-grade standard
EMT simulations. The WSCC 9-bus model was constructed in
PSCAD and utilizes the inverter models from [35], which are
quite complex and validated against real-world data from the
Maui power systems. In this system, all GFMs have a rated
capacity of 200 MV A, an active power droop constant of 5%,
and a power measurement time constant of 0.0628 seconds.
A 31.5 MW + 9 MV AR load step at Bus 6 was simulated. A
marginal loss constant of 1.035 is assumed. Visual inspection
of the results indicate that the data from PSCAD veriﬁes the
accuracy of the LIFE model, as shown in Fig. 7. The runtimes to
obtain ﬁve seconds of simulation data are given in Table IV.T o
further demonstrate the computational advantage of our method,
we also ran another version of the WSCC 9-bus system in Pow-
erWorld and used the REGFM_A1 model [38]. The proposed
model has the beneﬁt of signiﬁcantly accelerated solve time.
While this is a small test case, computational accelerations of
≈9,219x over EMT simulations and ≈3,384x over RMS sim-
ulations create incredible opportunities for online operational
applications.
The LIFE model was also validated against the 39 Bus system
following a 307.5 MW + 141 MV AR load step at Bus 15.
We observe good agreement between the LIFE model and the
Fig. 8. LIFE vs. PSCAD results in the 39-bus system. The HS metric is a
proxy for kinetic energy.
TABLE V
|ERROR| OF KEY METRICS IN THE 39-BUS SYSTEM:L I F EVS. PSCAD
TABLE VI
SETTLING VOLT AGEERROR [PU] IN THE 9-BUS SYSTEM:L I V EMODEL VS.
PSCAD SIMULA TIONS
simulated trajectories, as shown in Fig. 8. In addition to nadir
and RoCoF, we use the hertz-sec (HS) metric, which is a proxy
for the kinetic energy resulting from a disturbance, to evaluate
the accuracy of the LIFE model. The HS metric integrates the
absolute value of frequency deviation over the transient period,
as shown by the shaded area in Fig. 8(b). It is calculated using
HS =
∫
ts
t0
|f0 −f(t)|dt, where t0 andts are the time transient
behavior begins and the time settling frequency is reached,
respectively [23]. The pre-disturbance frequency is f
0 and the
transient frequency is a function of time, f(t). In Table V,
the error of nadir, RoCoF, and HS calculated using the LIFE
model are given. While error of these key metrics was small, the
required accuracy will be application-speciﬁc and as with any
reduced-order model, there is a chance of estimations that are
inconsistent with those of high-order models.
Next, we validate the LIVE model against the same simulation
scenarios (10% complex load step) used to generate the traces
in Figs. 7 and 8.A K
v value of 5 was used for both the 9
and 39 bus system. The results, shown in Table VI,F i g .9, and
TableVII point to the effectiveness of this approach. The PSCAD
voltage traces in Fig. 9 indicate negligible voltage oscillations,
and therefore voltage transients are well approximated by a
ﬁrst order model without feedback. The lack of oscillation in
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:48:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 9 =====
TRUJILLO et al.: ANAL YTICAL MODELS OF FREQUENCY AND VOLTAGE IN LARGE-SCALE ALL-INVERTER POWER SYSTEMS 2555
Fig. 9. LIVE (dashed lines) vs. PSCAD simulations (solid lines) in the IEEE
39 bus system.
TABLE VII
SETTLING VOLT AGEERROR [PU] IN THE 39-BUS SYSTEM:L I V EMODEL VS.
PSCAD SIMULA TIONS
the voltage magnitudes conﬁrms that local changes in voltage
magnitude and reactive power do not propagate well, and have a
negligible effect on voltage magnitude at surrounding generator
buses. While the inner-loop controls and LCL ﬁlter have an effect
on the change in voltage magnitude at the generator bus, reason-
able estimates of ΔQ
G and Kv provide good approximations
of voltage response without the need for explicit modeling of
inner-loop controls. The validity of this approach is supported
by the exceedingly small average error of settling voltage, which
was just 0.0019 pu in the 9 bus system and 0.0021 pu in the 39
bus system. In the 39 bus system, the largest change in voltage
magnitude was -0.011 pu, which occurred at Bus 35. However,
like the proposed frequency response model, the LIVE model
is a reduced-order model which carries some risk of inaccurate
voltage estimations.
V. S
CALABILITY AND APPLICA TION: 25,000-BUS SYSTEM
Having demonstrated the efﬁcacy of the proposed models
in the previous section, we now focus on their scalability and
provide a discussion on potential applications.
A. Scalability
The frequency response and voltage response models were
applied to the open-source ACTIVSg25 k synthetic grid of the
northeastern United States [39], which is shown in Fig. 10.T h i s
is an extremely large system, comprising most of three inde-
pendent system operators’ territories, with additional vertically
Fig. 10. 25 k bus synthetic grid of the northeastern United States [39].Al o a d
step was applied in New Y ork City, and frequency was observed in ﬁve regions
across the network.
integrated utility territory included. For every bus with multiple
generators, we aggregated generators into one generator with
an equivalent capacity. We then converted all the generators
with capacities exceeding 100 MV AR to be droop-controlled
GFMs. This resulted in 849 GFM buses. The remaining 24,151
buses are modeled as load buses in (4). All generators below
this capacity were considered GFLs and modeled as negative
load. A very large system formed entirely by GFMs is an
exaggerated version of potential future power systems. We
utilize the frequency and voltage models on such a system to
demonstrate their efﬁciency on systems where EMT simulation
would be impossible and computational efﬁciency is paramount.
A1 . 5 6G W+ 780 MV AR load step was applied to Bus 69665in
New Y ork City. The active power disturbance magnitude is
equal to the capacity of the largest online generator, and the
reactive power disturbance magnitude is equal to half of the
active power disturbance magnitude. The active-droop constant
and power measurement time constant of each inverter were
5% and 0.0628 seconds, respectively. The solution, given in
(18), was solved in only 1.877 seconds to obtain 1 s worth
of simulated frequency response, which is sufﬁcient given the
faster response of GFMs compared to SGs. To illustrate the
heterogeneity of frequency response, the predicted frequency
response in ﬁve different areas across the system are shown
in Fig. 11. The frequency trajectories for all GFM buses are
also shown. The results indicate that while all frequencies in
the system synchronize within a second, GFM buses closest to
the disturbance experience dramatic frequency oscillations and
more distant buses display much smoother trajectories. This be-
havior is expected, seeing as GFM buses closest to a disturbance
will be subjected to greater changes in active power injection,
according to (5). Also noteworthy is the time delay between the
onset of transients between areas close to the disturbance versus
areas farther from the disturbance. This is perhaps most obvious
when comparing the frequency trajectories in New Y ork City to
those in South Carolina, where frequency deviation is delayed
by about. 18 seconds. This heterogeneity in frequency response
trajectories across the system would not have been seen if one
were using a SFR model to represent the system with a single
trajectory.
Fig. 12 depicts the box plots of the LIFE nadir and RoCoF
values in the ACTIVSg25 k network post-disturbance. The
LIFE model captures the spatial and temporal differences in
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:48:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 10 =====
2556 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 41, NO. 4, JUL Y 2026
Fig. 11. Predicted frequency response in ﬁve regions across the ACTIVSg25 k
network. Frequency traces at all 849 GFM buses are shown in the bottom right
corner. All frequencies reached a stable value of 59.98 ± 0.005 Hz after 0.589
seconds.
Fig. 12. Box plots of nadir, absolute value of RoCoF, change in voltage
magnitude, and change in reactive power injection at each GFM bus in the
ACTIVSg25 k test case.
frequency response as these variations in frequency could mean
the difference between protection mechanisms tripping or not.
Therefore, the model’s ability to capture frequency response
extrema is exceedingly important. In this scenario, the average
frequency nadir was 59.96 Hz and the average RoCoF was
1.30 Hz/sec. Of the 849 GFM buses, 143 buses experienced
RoCoFs exceeding 1 Hz/sec and the maximum RoCoF was a
staggering 113.6 Hz/sec. As expected, the largest RoCoF values
were seen at buses closest to the disturbance and at buses with
small GFM capacities. Even so, the nadir frequency at these
buses is about 59.77 Hz, which does not violate the underfre-
quency load shedding limit [40].
The voltage response model solved in just 0.127 seconds due
to the approximation of Q-V dynamics as an open-loop process.
K
v was set equal to 5. As seen in Fig. 12, most GFM buses
experienced negligible changes in reactive power injection and
voltage magnitude, with a few crucial exceptions. The average
change in voltage magnitude was 0.0009 pu and the maximum
was 0.19 pu. The predicted voltage trajectories at GFM buses
whereΔV> 0.01 pu are shown in Fig.13. The greatest changes
in reactive power injection and voltage variations are seen at
the generators electrically closest to the load step location,
which makes sense given the limited range of reactive power
Fig. 13. V oltage trajectories at GFM buses where the change in voltage
magnitude exceeded 0.01 pu.
disturbances. There were four GFM buses at which reactive
power deﬁciency caused the voltage magnitude to settle below
0.95 pu.
B. Applications
The LIFE and LIVE models demonstrate promising utility for
several applications to enhance the efﬁciency of power system
studies; here we expand on three of them.
At present, methods for screening risks to dynamic stability
are largely limited to techniques based on the short-circuit ratio
(SCR) concept [41]. These SCR-based methods are limited in
that they do not yield post-disturbance frequency and voltage tra-
jectories, rather they are simply values meant to indicate where in
a system stability issues may arise. These methods also assume
identical IBRs and do not distinguish between control system
designs [41]. Seeing the need for screening methods that reveal
more about the transient behavior of a system than SCR-based
methods offer, the LIFE and LIVE models may be used prior
to full-order EMT simulation in order to identify dynamically
interesting operational scenarios and areas within a system most
vulnerable to instability. In this application, the models would
provide useful information regarding the predicted severity of
a disturbance in terms of voltage and frequency stability for
different dispatch and generation location scenarios.
Another potential application of the proposed models is for
parametric analysis. Conducting this type of analysis using
EMT tools is difﬁcult because it requires many computation-
ally expensive simulations. The signiﬁcant speed advantage
of the LIFE and LIVE models over EMT simulation makes
their application in parametric sensitivity analysis attractive, as
does the ability to derive participation matrices using the LIFE
and LIVE state-space representations. By using the proposed
models, analyzing the transient behavior of a system under a
wide range of parametric scenarios and mathematically drawing
connections between states and the dominant modes of a system
may be done rapidly.
Finally, the proposed models may be integrated into a variety
of long-range planning tools, including capacity expansion and
resource adequacy studies. Rather than only conducting a limited
number of stability studies with EMT simulation tools based on
the results of an optimization problem, the LIFE and LIVE mod-
els could be incorporated directly into an optimization frame-
work, allowing systems planners to introduce both frequency
and voltage stability as constraints. By integrating the proposed
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:48:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 11 =====
TRUJILLO et al.: ANAL YTICAL MODELS OF FREQUENCY AND VOLTAGE IN LARGE-SCALE ALL-INVERTER POWER SYSTEMS 2557
models into an optimization framework as described instead of
relying solely on EMT simulation, power system operators can
greatly reduce the number of required EMT simulations.
VI. C ONCLUSION
While frequency response models have a history spanning
decades, many models disregard the heterogeneity of the fre-
quency response and assume that the network is dominated by
synchronous generators. All disregard reactive power-voltage
dynamics. In this paper we present models of frequency and
voltage response for 100% IBR networks. The models were
validated on the WSCC 9 bus and IEEE 39 bus systems. The
models were then utilized to predict frequency and voltage
response in a 25,000 bus synthetic system. Our results indicate
that the models provide reasonable estimations of frequency and
voltage response at every GFM bus in the system while, crucially,
maintaining computational tractability, setting the basis for their
use in planning and operational applications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Dr. Mostafa Sedighizadeh, Mr. Har-
vey Scribner, and Mr. Nick Parker at Southwest Power Pool
(SPP), Dr. Mohammadi Mohammadi of the Australian Energy
Market Operator (AEMO), and Dr. Bruno Leonardi of the New
Y ork Independent System Operator (NYISO) for their insightful
feedback and constructive comments.
The views expressed in the article do not necessarily represent
the views of the DOE or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Gov-
ernment retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for
publication, acknowledges that the U.S. Government retains a
nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish
or reproduce the published form of this work, or allow others to
do so, for U.S. Government purposes.
REFERENCES
[1] Executive summary–Renewables 2023 – Analysis, “IEA,” 2024. [On-
line]. Available: https://www.iea.org/reports/renewables-2023/executive-
summary
[2] R. W. Kenyon, B. Wang, A. Hoke, J. Tan, C. Antonio, and B.-M. Hodge,
“V alidation of Maui PSCAD model: Motivation, methodology, and lessons
learned,” in Proc. 52nd North Amer . Power Symp., 2021, pp. 1–6.
[3] S. Zhu, D. Piper, D. Ramasubramanian, R. D. Quint, A. Isaacs, and R.
Bauer, “Modeling inverter-based resources in stability studies,” in Proc.
2018 IEEE Power Energy Soc. Gen. Meeting , 2018, pp. 1–5.
[4] J. G. Simmonds and J. E. Mann, A First Look at Perturbation Theory, 2nd
ed. New Y ork, NY , USA: Dover.
[5] P . Kokotovic and P . Sauer, “Integral manifold as a tool for reduced-order
modeling of nonlinear systems: A synchronous machine case study,”IEEE
Trans. Circuits Syst., vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 403–410, Mar. 1989.
[6] M. Chan, R. Dunlop, and F. Schweppe, “Dynamic equivalents for average
system frequency behavior following major distribances,” IEEE Trans.
Power App. Syst., vol. PAS-91, no. 4, pp. 1637–1642, Jul. 1972.
[7] P . M. Anderson and M. Mirheydar, “A low-order system frequency re-
sponse model,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 720–729,
Aug. 1990.
[8] D. L. H. Aik, “A general-order system frequency response model incorpo-
rating load shedding: Analytic modeling and applications,” IEEE Trans.
Power Syst., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 709–717, May 2006.
[9] Y . Zhang, Q. Guo, Y . Zhou, and H. Sun, “Frequency-constrained unit
commitment for power systems with high renewable energy penetration,”
Int. J. Elect. Power Energy Syst. , vol. 153, 2023, Art. no. 109274.
[10] I. Egido, F. Fernandez-Bernal, P . Centeno, and L. Rouco, “Maximum
frequency deviation calculation in small isolated power systems,” IEEE
Trans. Power Syst., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 1731–1738, Nov. 2009.
[11] L. Liu, W. Li, Y . Ba, J. Shen, C. Jin, and K. Wen, “An analytical model for
frequency Nadir prediction following a major disturbance,” IEEE Trans.
Power Syst., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 2527–2536, Jul. 2020.
[12] S. Y ang, Q. Meng, Y . Zhang, Z. Hao, and B. Zhang, “Simpliﬁed prediction
model of frequency Nadir for power systems penetrated with renewable
energy,” in Proc. 2022 IEEE Power Energy Soc. Gen. Meeting , 2022,
pp. 1–5.
[13] S. Dong, X. Fang, J. Tan, N. Gao, X. Cui, and A. Hoke, “A uniﬁed analytical
method to quantify three types of fast frequency response from inverter-
based resources,” in Proc. 22nd Wind Sol. Integration Workshop , 2023,
pp. 669–674.
[14] X. Wang, W. Li, J. Shen, S. Zhao, and Q. Zhang, “A three-machine
equivalent system frequency response model and its closed-form solution,”
Int. J. Elect. Power Energy Syst. , vol. 142, 2022, Art. no. 108344.
[15] Y . Lin et al., “Research roadmap on grid-forming inverters,” 2020. [On-
line]. Available: https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy21osti/73476.pdf
[16] Y . Du, X. Lu, and D. Zhao, “Model reduction for inverter-dominated
networked microgrids with grid-forming inverters,” in Proc. 47th Annu.
Conf. IEEE Ind. Electron. Soc. , 2021, pp. 1–6.
[17] O. Ajala, N. Baeckeland, B. Johnson, S. Dhople, and A. Domı´ nguez-
Garcıá, “Model reduction and dynamic aggregation of grid-forming in-
verter networks,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 5475–5490,
Nov. 2023.
[18] A. Sajadi and B.-M. Hodge, “Plane wave dynamic model of electric
power networks with high shares of inverter-based resources,” 2024,
arXiv:2401.16703.
[19] J. Machowski, Z. Lubosny, and J. W. Bialek, Power System Dynam-
ics. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2020.
[20] R. W. Kenyon, A. Sajadi, M. Bossart, A. Hoke, and B.-M. Hodge, “Inter-
active power to frequency dynamics between grid-forming inverters and
synchronous generators in power electronics-dominated power systems,”
IEEE Syst. J., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 3456–3467, Sep. 2023.
[21] A. Sajedi et al., “Guest editorial: Special issue on recent advancements
in electric power system planning with high-penetration of renewable
energy resources and dynamic loads,” Int. J. Elect. Power Energy Syst. ,
2021, vol. 129, Art. no. 106597. [Online]. Available: https://www.osti.
gov/biblio/1769842
[22] “GB power system disruption on 9 August 2019: Final report,” Jan. 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/
5e0e1fa9e5274a0fa7b4d96a/e3c-gbpower-disruption-9-august-2019-
ﬁnal-report.pdf
[23] A. Sajadi, R. W. Kenyon, and B.-M. Hodge, “Synchronization in elec-
tric power networks with inherent heterogeneity up to 100% inverter-
based renewable generation,” Nature Commun. , vol. 13, no. 1, 2022,
Art. no. 2490.
[24] L. Pagnier and P . Jacquod, “Inertia location and slow network modes
determine disturbance propagation in large-scale power grids,”PLoS One,
vol. 14, no. 3, 2019, Art. no. e0213550.
[25] N. A. E. R. Council, Technical analysis of the August 14, 2003 Blackout:
What Happened, Why, and What did We Learn? . Atlanta, GA, USA:
North Amer. Electric Rel. Council, 2004. [Online]. Available: https:
//books.google.com/books?id=ZfJ7MwEACAAJ
[26] F. Milano, F. Dörﬂer, G. Hug, D. J. Hill, and G. V erbiˇc, “Foundations and
challenges of low-inertia systems (invited paper),” in Proc. 2018 Power
Syst. Computation Conf., 2018, pp. 1–25.
[27] R. W. Kenyon, A. Hoke, J. Tan, and B.-M. Hodge, “Grid-following
inverters and synchronous condensers: A grid-forming pair,” inProc. 2020
Clemson Univ. Power Syst. Conf., 2020, pp. 1–7.
[28] B. Gentile, J. W. Simpson-Porco, F. Dörﬂer, S. Zampieri, and F. Bullo,
“On reactive power ﬂow and voltage stability in microgrids,” in Proc.
2014 Amer . Control Conf., 2014, pp. 759–764.
[29] M. Ilic-Spong and A. Phadke, “Redistribution of reactive power ﬂow in
contingency studies,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. TPWRS-1, no. 3,
pp. 266–274, Aug. 1986.
[30] S. Singh and S. Srivastava, “Improved voltage and reactive power distri-
bution factors for outage studies,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 12, no. 3,
pp. 1085–1093, Aug. 1997.
[31] P . A. Ruiz and P . W. Sauer, “Post-contingency voltage and reactive power
estimation and large error detection,” in Proc. 2007 39th North Amer .
Power Symp., 2007, pp. 266–272.
[32] M. G. Dozein, P . Mancarella, T. K. Saha, and R. Y an, “System strength
and weak grids: Fundamentals, challenges, and mitigation strategies,” in
Proc. 2018 Australas. Universities Power Eng. Conf. , 2018, pp. 1–7.
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:48:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 12 =====
2558 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 41, NO. 4, JUL Y 2026
[33] Frequently asked questions (FAQs) - U.S. Energy Information Adminis-
tration (EIA), 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/
faq.php
[34] B. Eldridge, R. O’Neill, and A. Castillo, “Marginal loss calculations for the
DCOPF,” 2016. [Online]. Available:https://www.osti.gov/biblio/1340633
[35] R. W. Kenyon, A. Sajadi, A. Hoke, and B.-M. Hodge, “Open-source
PSCAD grid-following and grid-forming inverters and a benchmark for
zero-inertia power system simulations,” inProc. 2021 IEEE Kansas Power
Energy Conf., 2021, pp. 1–6.
[36] B. Lesieutre and S. Roy, “A system response persistence measure for use
in ambient data monitoring,” in Proc. 2017 North Amer . Power Symp. ,
2017, pp. 1–5.
[37] H. L. Trentelman, A. A. Stoorvogel, and M. Hautus, Control Theory for
Linear Systems. New Y ork, NY , USA: Springer, 2001.
[38] W. Du et al., “Positive-sequence modeling of droop-controlled grid-
forming inverters for transient stability simulation of transmission sys-
tems,” IEEE Trans. Power Del., vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 1736–1748, Jun. 2024.
[39] A. B. Birchﬁeld, T. Xu, K. M. Gegner, K. S. Shetye, and T. J. Overbye,
“Grid structural characteristics as validation criteria for synthetic net-
works,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 3258–3265, Jul. 2017.
[40] “Manual 33 system protection manual,” New Y ork Independent System
Operator, Nov. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.nyiso.com/
documents/20142/2923301/System_Protection_Manual.pdf/e55deef5-
ae32-8324-60b8-a70bbfb33c50
[41] S. Grogan, M. Richwine, R. Quint, and J. Matevosyan, “Electromag-
netic transient models: Applications, limitations, and enablers in power
systems [feature],” IEEE Power Energy Mag. , vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 27–39,
Jul./Aug. 2025.
Marena Trujillo (Graduate Student Member) re-
ceived the B.S.E. degree in electrical engineering
from Loyola Marymount University, Los Angeles,
CA, USA, in 2021. She is currently working toward
the Ph.D. degree in electrical, computer & energy
engineering with the University of Colorado Boulder,
Boulder, CO, USA. She is also an NSF GRFP Fellow.
Her main research interests include the dynamics and
stability of low-inertia inverter-based power systems,
and the use of numerical methods and model re-
duction techniques to enable efﬁcient, high-ﬁdelity
simulation of large systems.
Amir Sajadi (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in systems and control engineering from
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH,
USA. He is currently an Associate Research Pro-
fessor with the Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Institute, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder,
CO, USA, and a Research Afﬁliate with National Re-
newable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO, USA. His
main research interests include modeling, planning,
dynamics, control, and management of large-scale
power systems to enhance the stability, security, and
resiliency of energy delivery.
Jonathan Shaw received the B.S. degree in applied
mathematics with a concentration in aerospace en-
gineering in 2023 from the University of Colorado
Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA, where he is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree with the Applied
Mathematics Department. His research interests in-
clude applied functional analysis, numerical analysis,
and asymptotic methods in the ﬁeld of low-inertia
power systems.
Bri-Mathias Hodge (Senior Member, IEEE) re-
ceived the B.S. degree from Carnegie Mellon Univer-
sity, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, the M.S. degree from ˚Abo
Akademi University, Turku, Finland, and the Ph.D.
from Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA.
He was a Chief Scientist and Distinguished Mem-
ber of Research Staff with Power Systems Engineer-
ing Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
He is currently a Professor with the Department of
Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering and an
Associate Director and a Fellow of the Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Institute, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO,
USA.
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:48:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 