
===== PAGE 1 =====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 37, NO. 4, JUL Y 2022 3141
Equivalent Circuit Model of Grid-Forming Converters With Circular Current
Limiter for Transient Stability Analysis
Bo Fan , Member , IEEE, and Xiongfei Wang , Senior Member , IEEE
Abstract—This letter develops an equivalent circuit model of a
grid-forming (GFM) converter with a circular current limiter and
analyzes its transient stability. It is revealed that the inner control
loop can be simpliﬁed as a voltage source behind an equivalent
resistor . Based on the developed model, theoretical analysis and
experimental tests demonstrate that the transient stability of a
P − f droop-controlled GFM converter with the circular current
limiter can be assured whenever there exist stable equilibrium
points.
Index Terms—Equivalent circuit model, circular current limiter,
grid-forming converter, transient stability.
I. I NTRODUCTION
I
N RECENT years, grid-forming (GFM) converters are
treated as an effective solution for power grids with high
penetration of converter-interfaced generators. By directly reg-
ulating the voltage and frequency based on the output power, the
GFM converters can provide the grid operators with enhanced
system stability and resilience [1].
Since the GFM converters behave as voltage sources behind
impedance, their output currents are highly dependent on the
electrical network conditions [1]. Further, the semiconductor-
based converter can only handle tens of percent of over-
current [2]. Current limiting strategies are hence required to pro-
tect the converters against large disturbances. Without changing
the operating mode of the GFM converter, two typical current
limiting methods are usually applied. The ﬁrst one modiﬁes the
voltage reference based on the virtual impedance [3]. The second
one directly restricts the current reference by using the current
limiters [4].
With these methods, the transient stability of GFM converters,
i.e., their ability to maintain synchronism with the power grid [5],
needs to be evaluated. This problem is recently investigated
in [3], [4]. In these studies, the voltage control loop is ignored
with the assumption of its limited impact on transient stability.
However, such a hypothesis does not hold for the circular current
limiters [6] since the angle of the saturated current reference is
Manuscript received August 18, 2021; revised November 9, 2021 and March
30, 2022; accepted April 30, 2022. Date of publication May 6, 2022; date
of current version June 20, 2022. This work was supported by the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme under the Marie
Skłodowska-Curie Grant 101031512 (FRESLING). Paper no. PESL-00208-
2021. (Corresponding author: Xiongfei Wang.)
The authors are with the Department of Energy (AAU Energy), Aalborg
University, 9220 Aalborg, Denmark (e-mail: bof@et.aau.dk; xwa@et.aau.dk).
Color versions of one or more ﬁgures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPWRS.2022.3173160.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TPWRS.2022.3173160
Fig. 1. Overall system diagram of a grid-connected GFM converter with the
circular current limiter.
determined by the voltage control loop. Therefore, the previous
transient stability results [3], [4] are not applicable for GFM
converters with circular current limiters. Moreover, although
numerical-simulation-based methods, such as the phase plane
analysis [7], may be applied to analyze the transient stability of
GFM converters, they lack the physical insights into the control
loops.
To this end, this letter attempts to investigate the physical
insights into the circular current limiter with the following
contributions:
1) An equivalent circuit model is established for the transient
stability analysis of the GFM converter with a power-based
synchronization mechanism. It is revealed that the inner control
loop with the circular current limiter can be modeled as an
equivalent resistor.
2) Based on the developed equivalent circuit model, the tran-
sient stability of P −f droop control is analyzed. It is found
that the GFM converter with the circular current limiter can
synchronize with the power grid whenever there exist stable
equilibrium points (SEPs).
Finally, these ﬁndings are validated by experimental tests.
II. G RID-CONNECTED GFM CONVERTER
Fig. 1 illustrates the system diagram of a GFM converter with
the circular current limiter. The converter is connected to the
grid through an LC-ﬁlter with Lf and Cf being its inductance
and capacitance. Lg and Rg represent the grid impedance. The
P −f droop control is used to synchronize the converter with
the grid. The voltage reference is achieved by the inner dual-loop
0885-8950 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 09:24:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 2 =====
3142 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 37, NO. 4, JUL Y 2022
proportional-integral (PI) control. The circular current limiter is
implemented to protect the converter against over-current. vabc
and vgabc are the capacitor and grid voltages, respectively. iabc
and if abc are the grid-side and converter-side currents, respec-
tively. (·)dq denotes a complex variable in the dq-frame.
The expression of the circular current limiter is given by
¯iref
f dq = σiref
f dq,σ =m i n
{
1,IM/∥iref
f dq∥
}
(1)
where iref
f dq is the original current reference generated by the
voltage control loop as shown in Fig. 1; ¯iref
f dq is the saturated
current reference; and IM is the maximum allowable converter-
side current magnitude. σis a real-valued coefﬁcient, i.e., only
the magnitudeiref
f dq is decreased when the circular current limiter
is triggered, while its angle is kept unchanged.
The P −f droop control is expressed as ωref = ωg +
KP (P ref −P ), whereωref is the angular frequency reference;ωg
is the nominal angular frequency;KP is the constant power con-
trol gain;P ref is the active power reference;P =1 .5Re{vdqi∗
dq}
is the active power output of the converter with (·)∗being the
conjugate of a complex variable.
III. P ROPOSED EQUIV ALENTCIRCUIT MODEL
This section introduces an equivalent circuit model of the
GFM converter shown in Fig. 1.
For the ease of the transient stability mechanism explanation
of the GFM converter with the circular current limiter, the
dynamics of the capacitor and inductor is ignored [2]–[4]. Since
the inner control loop is usually designed to be much faster
than the power one [1], [5], the current control loop dynamics is
ignored for simplicity, i.e.,if dq = ¯iref
f dq. Since the voltage integral
controller is used to remove the steady-state impact of modeling
errors [8], its dynamics can be ignored when the circular current
limiter is not triggered [5], [9], i.e.,vdq = vref
dq withvref
dq being the
capacitor voltage reference. These assumptions are later justiﬁed
by the experimental results presented in Section V.
When the circular current limiter is triggered, the voltage
control loop is unable to regulate the capacitor voltage to its
reference vref
dq . To avoid the integrator windup, the voltage inte-
gral controller is kept at zero during the current limiting period.
Afterward, according to Fig. 1, the current reference iref
f dq can be
expressed as
iref
f dq = KV
P
(
vref
dq −vdq
)
+idq + jωgCfvdq (2)
where KV
P is the voltage control proportional gain. Notice that
if dq = idq + jωgCfvdq since the dynamics of the capacitor is
ignored. Further, with if dq = ¯iref
f dq and (1), (2) is rewritten as
if dq = σKV
P
(
vref
dq −vdq
)
+σif dq ⇒ Reif dq = vref
dq −vdq (3)
whereRe ≜ 1−σ
σKV
P
is a positive real variable.
When the circular current limiter is not triggered, i.e., σ=1 ,
then one has vdq = vref
dq , which can also be represented by (3)
withRe =0 . Therefore, the inner control loop with the circular
current limiter can be represented as a voltage source behind
equivalent resistanceRe as shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2. Equivalent circuit of a grid-connected GFM converter. The blue part
denotes the inner control loop with the circular current limiter.
IV . APPLICA TION FOR TRANSIENT ST ABILITYANAL YSIS
A. Closed-Loop System Dynamics
In this section, the closed-loop system dynamics is derived to
allow for the transient stability analysis of the converter. Deﬁne
δas the angle between the d-axis and vgdq, whose dynamics can
be expressed as
˙δ= ωref −ωg = KP
(
P ref −P
)
. (4)
In order to derive the closed-loop system dynamics, it requires
the relationship between P and δ. Since the capacitor is used
to ﬁlter out the high-frequency component of the converter-side
current, it has a limited impact on transient stability and is hence
ignored [4]. The capacitor voltage reference is aligned with the
d-axis, i.e., vref
dq = V refej0 with V ref being the voltage reference
magnitude. Based on the Kirchhoff circuit law of the equivalent
circuit in Fig. 2 and the given voltage sources vref
dq = V ref and
vgdq = Vg e−jδwithVg being the grid voltage magnitude, P can
be expressed as a nonlinear function of δ
P = 3
2
[ (Re +Rg )((V ref)2 −V refVg cosδ)
(Re +Rg )2 +ω2gL2g
−ReI2
M
+ ωgLgV refVg sinδ
(Re +Rg )2 +ω2gL2g
]
(5)
whereRe =m a x{0, Re{ ¯Re}} with
¯Re =
√
(V ref)2 −2 V refVg cosδ+V 2g
I2
M
−ω2gL2g −Rg (6)
being a state-dependent function. Therefore, the ﬁrst-order
closed-loop system dynamics can be represented by (4) and (5).
B. Transient Stability Analysis
The stability of the ﬁrst-order nonlinear system in (4) and (5)
can be evaluated similarly to the analysis in [9], which is ensured
if and only if there exist SEPs.
Two examples of grid voltage drops are given to better
illustrate the transient stability of the system. Based on the
parameters listed in Table I, the P −δcurves with Vg =1 p.u.
and Vg =0 .5 p.u. can be calculated based on (4) and (5). As
s h o w ni nF i g .3 ,w h e nVg =1 p.u., there are two intersection
points between the P −δcurve and the active power reference
P ref for δ∈[0, 2π), where the solid green dot denotes the
SEP and the hollow one denotes the unstable equilibrium point
(UEP). ForVg =0 .5 p.u., no SEP or UEP exists. The green lines
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 09:24:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 3 =====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 37, NO. 4, JUL Y 2022 3143
Fig. 3. Examples of transient stability analysis when grid voltage drops from 1 p.u. to 0.5 p.u. (SEP–Solid dot; UEP–Hollow dot).
TABLE I
SYSTEM AND CONTROL PARAMETERS
demonstrate the theoretically calculated trajectories of the active
power outputs under two different conditions.
The ﬁrst example is shown in the left picture in Fig. 3 with a
relatively short period of the grid voltage drop, i.e., the angle δ
is smaller than the UEP when the fault is clear. At the beginning,
the system is working normally at the SEP . Then the grid voltage
drops from 1 p.u. to 0.5 p.u. and the active power outputP jumps
from the purple line to the pink one. SinceP<P ref, the angleδ
increases according to (4). Afterward, the grid voltage restores
t o1p . u .a n dP jumps back to the purple line. From the zoomed
picture, one can observe that δis smaller than the UEP and
P>P ref after the disturbance. Thus,δkeeps decreasing until it
returns to its original operating point.
The second example is shown in the right picture in Fig. 3.
Compared with the previous example, the grid voltage drops for
a longer time, and the angle δis larger than the UEP when the
fault is clear. Consequently, when the grid voltage restores to
1 p.u., δis larger than the UEP and P<P ref from the zoomed
picture. Hence, δkeeps increasing along with the purple line
until it stabilizes at the new SEP .
V. E XPERIMENTAL TESTS
The detailed experimental setup can be found in [10] with the
system and control parameters listed in Table I. The experimental
results are delivered in Figs. 4–6.
Fig. 4. Experimental results when the grid voltage drops to 0.5 p.u.
The evaluation results of the proposed equivalent circuit
model are illustrated in Fig. 4. One can notice that during the
pre-fault period, the capacitor voltage can track its reference
accurately since the circular current limiter is not triggered. The
active power output is kept at its reference value of 0.8 p.u.
Afterward, the grid voltage drops to 0.5 p.u. The converter-side
current reaches its maximum allowable magnitude of 1.2 p.u.,
which triggers the circular current limiter. Hence, the capacitor
voltage cannot track its reference accurately. During the failure
process, the voltage difference vref
a −va has the same phase as
the converter-side current if a, which means that an equivalent
resistor is introduced between the capacitor voltage and its refer-
ence to limit the converter-side current. Therefore, the equivalent
circuit model developed in Section III is valid.
Fig. 5 presents the results when the grid voltage drops from
1 p.u. to 0.5 p.u. for 450 ms. During the fault period, the
converter-side current magnitude is restricted by 1.2 p.u. When
the fault is clear, although the circular current limiter is still
triggered for about 50 ms, the active power output, the angle
δ, and the capacitor voltage can ﬁnally return to their normal
operating points.
As shown in Fig. 6, the fault time is increased to 650 ms.
Again, the converter-side current magnitude is well restricted.
As illustrated in Section IV, since the fault time becomes longer,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 09:24:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 4 =====
3144 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 37, NO. 4, JUL Y 2022
Fig. 5. Experimental results when the grid voltage drops from 1 p.u. to 0.5 p.u.
for 450 ms.
Fig. 6. Experimental results when the grid voltage drops from 1 p.u. to 0.5 p.u.
for 650 ms.
the angel δkeeps increasing until it stabilizes at a new SEP .
Although transient stability is ensured, large ﬂuctuations are
observed in the active power output.
VI. C ONCLUSION
This letter reveals the physical insights into the control loops
of a GFM converter using a circular current limiter. It is found
that the inner control loop with the circular current limiter can
be represented by a voltage source behind an equivalent resistor.
Based on the developed model, transient stability with theP −f
droop control is further investigated. The results reveal that the
GFM converter can synchronize with the power grid as long as
there exist SEPs. Finally, experimental tests are performed to
verify the theoretical analysis. Further studies including appli-
cations of the proposed model for the transient stability analysis
of multiple GFM converters will be investigated.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Rosso, X. Wang, M. Liserre, X. Lu, and S. Engelken, “Grid-forming
converters: Control approaches, grid-synchronization, and future trends—
Ar e v i e w , ”IEEE Open J. Ind. Appl. , vol. 2, pp. 93–109, 2021.
[2] T. Qoria, F. Gruson, F. Colas, X. Kestelyn, and X. Guillaud, “Current
limiting algorithms and transient stability analysis of grid-forming VSCs,”
Elect. Power Syst. Res., vol. 189, 2020, Art. no. 106726.
[3] T. Qoria, F. Gruson, F. Colas, G. Denis, T. Prevost, and X. Guillaud,
“Critical clearing time determination and enhancement of grid-forming
converters embedding virtual impedance as current limitation algorithm,”
IEEE J. Emerg. Sel. Topics Power Electron., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1050–1061,
Jun. 2020.
[4] L. Huang, H. Xin, Z. Wang, L. Zhang, K. Wu, and J. Hu, “Transient stability
analysis and control design of droop-controlled voltage source converters
considering current limitation,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid , vol. 10, no. 1,
pp. 578–591, Jan. 2019.
[5] X. Wang, M. G. Taul, H. Wu, Y . Liao, F. Blaabjerg, and L. Harnefors, “Grid-
synchronization stability of converter-based resources—An overview,”
IEEE Open J. Ind. Appl. , vol. 1, pp. 115–134, 2020.
[6] M. G. Taul, X. Wang, P . Davari, and F. Blaabjerg, “Current limiting
control with enhanced dynamics of grid-forming converters during fault
conditions,” IEEE J. Emerg. Sel. Topics Power Electron. , vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 1062–1073, Jun. 2020.
[7] M. Awal and I. Husain, “Transient stability assessment for current con-
strained and unconstrained fault ride-through in virtual oscillator con-
trolled converters,” IEEE J. Emerg. Sel. Topics Power Electron. ,v o l .9 ,
no. 6, pp. 6935–6946, Dec. 2021.
[8] L. Harnefors, M. Bongiorno, and S. Lundberg, “Input-admittance calcu-
lation and shaping for controlled voltage-source converters,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Electron., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 3323–3334, Dec. 2007.
[9] H. Wu and X. Wang, “Design-oriented transient stability analysis of grid-
connected converters with power synchronization control,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Electron., vol. 66, no. 8, pp. 6473–6482, Aug. 2019.
[10] B. Fan and X. Wang, “A Lyapunov-based nonlinear power control algo-
rithm for grid-connected VSCs,”IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 69, no. 3,
pp. 2916–2926, Mar. 2022.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 09:24:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 