
===== PAGE 1 =====
3456 IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL. 17, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023
Interactive Power to Frequency Dynamics Between
Grid-Forming Inverters and Synchronous Generators
in Power Electronics-Dominated Power Systems
Rick Wallace Kenyon , Member , IEEE, Amirhossein Sajadi , Senior Member , IEEE,
Matt Bossart , Student Member , IEEE, Anderson Hoke , Senior Member , IEEE,
and Bri-Mathias Hodge , Senior Member , IEEE
Abstract—With increased attention on grid-forming inverters as
a power system stabilizing device during high shares of inverter-
based resource operations, there is a present need for a transparent
and methodical investigation of the inverted and direct power
to frequency control capabilities and impacts of these devices on
emerging power systems. Here, analysis of the frequency dynamics
of the droop-controlled grid-forming inverter and the synchronous
generator illuminates the inverted active power-frequency rela-
tionship and the frequency response order reduction, forming the
basis for novel, nonlinear frequency control approaches. Device-
level electromagnetic transient domain simulations corroborate the
order-reduction ﬁndings, establish that a properly designed dc-side
system has a negligible impact on power transfer and will not
impede frequency regulation, and conﬁrm the primary frequency
response improvement with nonlinear control. Simulations of the 9-
and 39-bus test systems validate the order reduction and associated
decoupling of the nadir and rate of change of frequency in larger
networks. Oscillatory mode analysis conﬁrms the grid-forming
beneﬁt of increased damping; decreased damping is observed at
shares above 80%, but not at 100%. Finally, simulations on a
validated Maui power system model with a 96% of inverter-based
resources model yield a trend toward a ﬁrst-order response.
Index Terms —Frequency response, nonlinear control, oscil-
latory modes, synchronous generators (SGs), grid-forming
inverters.
I. I NTRODUCTION
T
HE integration of renewable energy resources into power
systems is primarily accomplished with power electronic
inverters [i.e., inverter-based resources (IBRs)], the majority
of which have hitherto employed grid-following (GFL) control
strategies that rely on an established voltage and frequency at the
point of interconnection to be explicitly tracked with a phase-
locked loop (PLL) for operation [1]. It is well documented that
instability can occur for high penetrations of GFL inverters [2],
[3]; operating with 100% GFL inverters is infeasible. As a result,
Manuscript received 9 May 2022; revised 17 November 2022 and 31 January
2023; accepted 3 March 2023. Date of publication 4 April 2023; date of current
version 30 August 2023. (Corresponding author: Bri-Mathias Hodge.)
The authors are with the University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder,
CO 80309-0401 USA, the Renewable and Sustainable Energy Institute,
and also with the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO
80401 USA (e-mail: rike4641@colorado.edu; Amir.Sajadi@colorado.edu;
matthew.bossart@colorado.edu; andy.hoke@nrel.gov; BriMathias.Hodge@
colorado.edu).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JSYST.2023.3257284
attention has shifted to grid-forming (GFM) control, where the
IBR establishes a local voltage phasor with synchronization
objectives [4], such as frequency droop [5], and the output
frequency of the device is a direct controller action related to
delivered active power; a similar relationship is often established
for voltage and reactive power[6]. The focus of this article is the
interaction of these GFM devices with synchronous generators
(SGs) that have an immediate inertial response to active power
differentials dictated by physics, as opposed to control design,
followed by the slower governor response that manages the
power transfer.
High shares of IBRs introduce a broad set of challenges to
power systems that have been highlighted in the contemporary
literature [1], [7], [8]; however, the focus of this work is restricted
to the problem of frequency stability. Recent publications on the
challenges of frequency stability in low inertia power systems
have pointed toward the potential of GFM inverters to mitigate
these stability challenges [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15],
[16]. The authors of [9], [10], [11] have extensively studied the
small-signal stability of power systems with integrated GFMs
by developing high-ﬁdelity differential-algebraic models; fre-
quently, nonzero, minimum SG quantities are declared nec-
essary to preserve system stability, while the opportunity for
novel frequency regulation with GFMs is often neglected. The
feasibility of operating bulk power systems with 100% GFM-
based generation has been demonstrated computationally in the
electro-magnetic transient (EMT) [12], [16], and phasor [13],
domains, which encourages these devices as a solution to the
aforementioned 100% GFL infeasibility. Tayyebi et al. [12]
investigated the dynamic interactions between GFMs and SGs,
but restricted the approach to GFMs augmenting the SG-driven
inertial frequency response. Some studies have begun to identify
the dampinglike contribution of droop controlled GFM inverters
to frequency dynamics [4], [12], [13], [14], but once again these
view GFM impacts in the context of SG-dominated frequency
dynamics.
This review of the literature suggests that GFMs are pri-
marily viewed through the lens of SG-driven frequency dy-
namics, and that there is a present need for an in-depth, side
by side investigation of the power to frequency dynamics of
these two devices. This article aims to address this deﬁcit with
a fundamental discussion on the inverted operation of GFM
inverters (i.e., frequency is calculated and established based
on a controller-speciﬁed active power delivery relationship), as
compared to the reactive primary frequency control of SGs. To
1937-9234 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:51:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 2 =====
KENYON et al.: INTERACTIVE POWER TO FREQUENCY DYNAMICS BETWEEN GRID-FORMING INVERTERS 3457
Fig. 1. Research methodology employed, with analysis and simulation indi-
cated.
this end, the foundational active power transfer dynamics of
GFMs and SGs are analyzed to establish the inverted operation
and order reduction, which leads to the presentation of novel
nonlinear frequency control. With the analysis predicated on
inverter energy conversion on the order of ac-side delivery, the
dc-side dynamics are studied with device level EMT simulations
that additionally corroborate the inverted operation and reduced
order frequency dynamics. Furthermore, simulations on large
test networks, and on a validated model of the Maui island of
Hawaii power system, corroborate these order reductions and
uncover an unusual oscillatory phenomenon at very low inertia
levels. The trajectory of this research is presented in in Fig. 1,
which shows the general methodology applied and the natural
progression of the document.
The three primary contributions of this work as follows.
1) Contribution 1: Mathematical analysis of the power to
frequency dynamics of the SG and GFM devices estab-
lishes the inverted active power relationship and order
reduction, which supports the presentation of a set of novel
nonlinear frequency droop concepts for GFM devices (see
Section II).
2) Contribution 2: It is shown with device-level EMT simu-
lations of full order models of the dc- and ac-side systems
(Section III) that a properly designed dc-side subsystem
has a negligible impact on the active power transfer of
GFM devices and will not impede frequency regulation
(see Section IV -A3).
3) Contribution 3: EMT simulations at the device level
conﬁrm the analytic conclusions of contribution 1 (see
Section IV -A), while simulations at the network level with
the IEEE 9- and 39-bus test systems (see Section IV -B)
demonstrate the decoupling of the nadir and rate of change
of frequency with GFM devices. This is a departure from
the traditional understanding of frequency dynamics [17],
[18], as a result of the network-wide transition toward
ﬁrst-order dynamics. Simulations on a validated model
of the Maui power system demonstrate the trajectory to
a ﬁrst-order response in a real-world power system with
96% share of IBRs (see Section V).
The work contained in this document highlights the authors’
view that the presence of IBRs with creative controller applica-
tion can redeﬁne the foundations of frequency dynamics in future
power systems. The remainder of the document now proceeds
as laid out in the research methodology from Fig. 1.
II. D EVICE POWER TO FREQUENCY DYNAMICS AND ANAL YSIS
Each generation device, i.e., converter, converts a precon-
verter active power (pm), such as electrochemical energy from
a battery for the GFM, or mechanical energy primed by steam,
water, or combustion gases for the SG, into ac electrical energy
(pe); from here on this is referred to as theactive power through-
put process. Suppose pm and pe relate for each device, where
the second subscript (either G or I ) indicates the applicable
device (i.e., G → SG, and I → GFM ). Each type of converter
stores a quantity of energy, either as kinetic energy for the SG,
Eint,G = 1
2Iω2
mech, with I and ωbeing the moment of inertia
and shaft rotational velocity, respectively, or within the GFM
primarily as electrical capacitive storage, Eint,I = 1
2CDCV 2
DC ,
withCDC andVDC being the dc link capacitance and capacitor
voltage, respectively. Generally, Eint,G >> Eint,I [19].N o t e
that in a lossless system, conservation of energy requires that
˙E ̸=0 ifpm ̸= pe.1
A. Grid F orming Inverter
A variety of GFM control strategies have been presented in
the literature, such as droop [5], multiloop droop [14], virtual
synchronous machine [20], virtual oscillator control [21], and
matching control [22]. Generally, they all achieve a similar
objective with the construction of a voltage and frequency at
the point of interconnection with dynamics associated via a
power export relationship. Here, the device of focus is the
multiloop droop control GFM (henceforth, GFM now explicitly
means this droop control). The virtual synchronous machine
establishes higher order dynamics equitable to SGs by design;
it is not investigated because the interest is the contrast of varied
frequency responses. The others generally emulate droop control
outside of transients.
Preconverter power (pm,I ) is supplied to the converter via a
dc voltage source in the form of electrical or electrochemical
energy. A critical assumption in this study is the availability
of energy and power via a battery energy storage system. 2 The
limited power availability condition is outside the scope of this
work; however, GFM backed battery energy storage systems
dispatched with available headroom are a likely future operating
condition. Electrical active power ( pe,I ) is fed to the electrical
network, with the power to frequency dynamics being directly
controlled as the following:
˙δI = ωset +Mp(pset −pm,I) (1)
whereδI is the GFM phase angle, ωn is the frequency set point
(e.g., 60 Hz in North America),Mp is the frequency droop value,
andpset is the initial active power set point.
The distinction between GFM preconverter power (pm,I ) and
electrical power (pe,I ) is made to create the comparison analogy;
physically, these values are differentiated by a low-pass ﬁlter
(LPF) in this particular GFM control design. The assumption that
pm,I is readily available within the LPF risetime is shown valid
with an appropriately designed dc-side system in Section IV -A3
with EMT simulations. The LPF dynamical relation between
pm,I andpe,I is as follows:
˙pm,I = 2π(pe,I −pm,I)
τI
(2)
1dot notation indicates time derivative; ˙x = d
dt x.
2Other sources of dispatchable power exist for the GFM, such as curtailed
photovoltaic output.
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:51:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 3 =====
3458 IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL. 17, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023
whereτI is the ﬁlter time constant. The work in [9] found a limit
of 5ωI,fil >ωn, which indicates that ωI,fil should be greater
than 75 rd/s in a 60 Hz system, and therefore τI ≤0.08 s.
B. Synchronous Generator
In modeling the SG, three distinct components are
considered—the machine, the exciter, and the governor/turbine.
Here, the converter is understood to be the set of all three
elements combined. In this section, only the machine and gover-
nor/turbine dynamics are investigated. The rotational mechanics
of the SG are dictated by the swing equation, as shown in the
following, with the damping component withheld for simplicity:
˙δG = ωG −ωs (3)
˙ωG = 1
M (pm,G −pe,G) (4)
whereδG is the SG phase angle, ωG is the SG rotor speed, ωs is
the synchronous speed (equivalent toω0 for a two pole machine),
M = 2H
ωs
withH the inertia time constant of the machine,pm,G
is the preconverter mechanical power supplied by the turbine
primed by gas, hydro, or steam, and pe,G is the electrical power
delivered to the grid.
The dynamics of pm,G are dictated by the governor, with a
multitude of various implementations in contemporary practice.
However, these dynamics can be broadly described by a dom-
inant ﬁrst-order ﬁlter element, as expressed in the following:
˙pm,G = RD
−1 (ωo −ωG)−(pm,G −pm,G,o)
τG
(5)
where RD is the droop setting of the device (including a factor
of2π),pm,G,o is the preconverter power set point, and τG is the
governor response time. The value of τG can vary substantially
depending on type and model, but is generally not less than
0.5 s [19].
C. Device Comparison With Order Reduction
The active power throughput processes of the GFM (with
variables of interest pm,I , ωI , and pm,I ) and SG ( pm,G, ωG,
and pe,G) are fundamentally different and these disparate pro-
cesses heavily inﬂuence the frequency response characteristics
of the respective devices. In this section, these relationships are
analyzed and contrasted.
By the control design in (2), pm,I has a ﬁrst-order relation
to pe,I ; i.e., pm,I evolves based only on deviations in pe,I .F o l -
lowing,δI evolves according to (1). Therefore, GFM frequency
is a function of the preconverter power; the device meets the
increase in power demand (pe,I ), and then adjusts the frequency
according to the droop relation (recall the assumption of suf-
ﬁcient head room). A GFM does not require local frequency
deviations in order for pm,I to evolve. With the SG, pm,G is
af u n c t i o no fωG (5), a relation that is the inverse of the GFM
pm,I –ωI relationship. That is, the governor of the SG modulates
pm,G as a function of ωG, as opposed to the GFM where
ωI is changed only after pm,I is matched to the deﬁcit. With
droop control, the GFM frequency is changed to accomplish
power sharing and synchronization in a fashion similar to the
Newtonian action of the SG and subsequent governor action; but,
the underlying active power throughput power process yields an
inverted relationship between frequency and power differentials
as compared to the SG. Simply, it can be said that with respect
to frequency, whereas the SG is a reactive device, the GFM is a
proactive device.
A further note can be made regarding thepm–pe relation order
of the two devices. With the SG active power throughput process,
(4) is substituted within the derivative of (5) to produce
¨pm,G = −RD
−1 ˙ωG −˙pm,G
τG
(6)
= −(RDM)−1 (pm,G −pe,G)−˙pm,G
τG
(7)
which exhibits that pm,G has a second-order relation to pe,G,
contrasting with the ﬁrst-order dynamics relating pm,I andpe,I
of the GFM.
Now, the singular perturbation theory mathematical tech-
nique [23], which separates varying timescale dynamical sys-
tems, is applied to the active power-frequency dynamics analysis
of the GFM and SG to discern the respective relationships be-
tweenpm andω. Note that both(2) and (5), the power conversion
dynamical equations for the GFM and SG, respectively, are
ﬁrst-order differential equations, with time constants τI and
τG, respectively. There is, in general, an order of magnitude
of separation between these values; i.e., τI << τG. Therefore,
where the time scale of interest is the settling of frequency
dynamics associated with the SG, using the foundations of sin-
gular perturbation analysis, the follow relation can be established
˙pm,I ≈0; thus, according to (2),pm,I ≈pe,I .
Due to the relatively slower response of the SG governor,
immediately following a disturbance the difference between
pm,G,o and pm,G is negligible; i.e., pm,G,o ≈pm,G. Applying
these approximations, the frequency dynamics relevant before
substantial SG governor action of the GFM (1) and SG (3)
and (4) can be reformulated. The approximated GFM frequency
dynamics are given in the following:
˙δI = MP(pm,I,o −pe,I)
∝−pe,I (8)
where ∝ is the proportional operator. The approximated SG
frequency dynamics are given in the following:
˙δG = ωG −ωo (9)
˙ωG = 1
M (pm,G,o −pe,G)
∝−pe,G. (10)
From (8), it can be concluded that ωI is proportional to pe,I ;
therefore, considering the ﬁrst-order relation ofpe,I andpm,I in
(2), GFM frequency has a ﬁrst-order relation with preconverter
power, ˙δI ∝pm,I .F r o m(9) and (10), with respect to pe,G the
frequency dynamics of the SG follow a ﬁrst-order response.
Noting the second-order relation between pe,G andpm,G in (6),
it is concluded that the frequency dynamics of the SG have at
least a third-order relation with respect to preconverter power
within this approximating time frame.
It is highlighted that the droop gain ( RD ) parameter for the
SG is in the denominator with respect to preconverter power(6).
Therefore, the value of ofRD cannot be zero, while for stability
purposes it cannot be near zero due to the resultant rapidity of
pm,G. Note, RD is typically held constant (e.g., 5% in North
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:51:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 4 =====
KENYON et al.: INTERACTIVE POWER TO FREQUENCY DYNAMICS BETWEEN GRID-FORMING INVERTERS 3459
TABLE I
NONLINEAR FUNCTIONS;W ITH PARAMETER VALUES
America) for all frequency responsive devices on a system, for
equitable power sharing purposes. For the case of the droop value
Mp of the GFM, there is no mathematical limit for the value; the
smaller the value the slower the resultant frequency dynamics,
i.e., the ROCOF, with a time differentiation of (8).
D. Potential for Nonlinear Frequency Control
Having fully established the inverted relation of active power
and frequency of the GFM and determined the timescale reduc-
tion of the GFM dynamics, the presentation of potential nonlin-
ear frequency responses for GFM inverters is made. Note that in
all of these relations, the primary droop elements are maintained,
namely a decrease in frequency for an increase in load, which is
necessary to maintain synchronicity in ac systems [4]. Consider
the basic frequency-active power equation, which is the general
form of (1)
˙δI = ωset −f(pm,I) (11)
where f(pm,I) is the frequency response function of pm,I .I n
the standard droop formulation, f(pm,I) is a linear function,
Mp ×pm,I , where Mp is the droop value (the initial active
power set point correction is omitted for clarity). The potential of
three other functions is investigated; a quadratic, an exponential
(initially presented by the authors in [24]), and a power law. The
equations are presented in Table I, with the chosen constants for
this study provided.
Fig. 6 shows the frequency control output for(11), for the four
different functions listed in Table I. The under frequency load
shed (UFLS) potential region is presented for exemplary pur-
poses only; the frequency value of UFLS will vary from system
to system. For a GFM dispatched at 0.1 per unit, the traces show
how the frequency output varies based on the delivered power.
With the chosen parameters, each of the nonlinear functions
will deliver more power with less deviation in frequency, with
all three yielding at least 0.2 per unit more active power to
the network prior to the UFLS region than the linear droop.
The shallower initial tangential droop values indicated smaller
ROCOFs. A potential issue with the Power function is the zero
valued droop at zero power output; a zero valued droop gain
has been shown to be unstable in [24].A s pm,I,set changes, the
corresponding position on the nonlinear curve will change as
well; pm,I,set deﬁnes where on the curve the 60 Hz crossing
occurs.
An obvious deviation in power sharing will occur with these
nonlinear droop functions. This problem (secondary frequency
response) has been solved in [24], where an autonomous power
sharing controller was developed that brings the GFM active
power output back to an equitable per unit value with other
frequency responsive devices on the network. This autonomous
controller permits the initial response of the GFM to be whatever
the designer desires, while secondary control can achieve power
Fig. 2. Nonlinear droop functions, compared with linear droop. The droop
gain changes dynamically, as the GFM power pm,I changes.
Fig. 3. Control scheme of multiloop droop grid-forming inverter—some in-
terconnecting signals are not shown.
sharing within seconds of the initial deviation. Here the focus
is on the improved primary frequency response with nonlinear
functions. These nonlinear functions are simulated in a small
system consisting of a GFM and an SG in Section IV -A4.
III. D ETAILED MAT H E M AT I C A LDESCRIPTION OF CONVERTERS
FOR SIMULA TION
The mathematical models representing the GFM and SG
devices in the EMT simulations are presented.
A. Grid F orming Inverters
The control scheme of the GFM inverter is shown in Fig. 3.
High frequency pulse width modulation and switching is not
modeled, with averaged voltage signals being provided to ideal
voltage sources as a standard power electronics approxima-
tion [25]. In this control, anLC output ﬁlter meets with a coupling
inductor to create the LCL topology shown in Fig. 3.T h e
ﬁlter inductor current ( if ) and ﬁlter capacitor voltage ( vo)a r e
regulated by proportional-integral (PI) controllers operated in
the direct-quadrature (dq) synchronous reference frame. That is,
¯xdq = Tdq¯xabc, where ¯xabc is a 3-D column vector representing
the sinusoidal three phase waveforms, ¯xdq is a two dimensional
column vector representing the nonsinusoidal d- and q-axes
waveforms, andTdq is the 2× 3 Park transformation matrix[26].
The instantaneous active (pe,I ) and reactive (qe,I )p o w e r si n
the dq frame are calculated as pe,I = ℜ(vdq
g ,idq,∗
o )3 and qe,I =
ℑ(vdq
g ,idq,∗
o ), where vdq
g and idq
o are the dq frame grid voltages
and coupling ﬁlter currents, respectively, represented in the
complex domain (i.e., α+jβ). The instantaneous powers pe,I
andqe,I are passed through an LPF with cutoff frequencyωI,fil ,
3∗denotes the complex conjugate.
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:51:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 5 =====
3460 IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL. 17, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023
as shown in (12) (reformulated from (2), whereωI,fil =2 π/τI )
and (13)
˙pm,I = ωI,fil (pe,I −pm,I) (12)
˙qm,I = ωI,fil (qe,I −qm,I). (13)
The currents across the ﬁlter resistor (Rf ) and inductor (Lf ),
idq
f are regulated with proportional integral (PI) controllers
(depicted by the current controller block in Fig. 3)
˙γdq = idq
f −idq
f,∗ (14)
vdq
i,∗= ki
Cγdq +kp
C ˙γdq −jωILfidq
f +GCvdq
o (15)
where γdq are integrator error states (not mapped in the imagi-
nary plane), ki
C and kp
C are the integral and proportional gains,
respectively,ωI is the radian frequency from the droop relation
and GC is the voltage feed forward gain. The controller gains
are tuned to cancel the inductor pole. The response time of the
inner current loop is on the order of 1 ms. The capacitor ( Cf )
voltage is also regulated with a PI controller, as depicted by the
following (depicted by the voltage controller block in Fig. 3):
˙ξdq = vdq
o −vdq
o,∗ (16)
idq
f,∗= ki
V ξdq +kp
V ˙ξdq −jωICfvdq
o +GV idq
o (17)
where ξdq are the integrator error states (not mapped in the
imaginary plane), ki
V and kp
V are the integral and proportional
gains, respectively, andGV is the current feed forward gain. The
response time of the voltage controller is on the order of 10 ms.
The fundamental governing equations of the multiloop droop
grid forming inverter are given by the previously discussed (1)
and (18), which are represented in the power controller block in
Fig. 3, with the voltage relation
vq
o,∗= vq
o,set +Mq(qset −qm,I) (18)
whereqset is the predisturbance power set points,pm,I andqm,I
are as deﬁned in (12) and (13),vq
o,∗is the set point for the voltage
controller (vd
o,∗=0 ), vq
o,set is the predisturbance steady state
voltage, and Mq is the voltage droop value.
A zeroth-order model with a voltage source and resistor is
used to represent the battery as shown the dc-side system panel of
Fig. 3. Higher order battery models, with seriesRL/RC branches,
have a negligible impact on the battery response[27]. The battery
output voltage is therefore as follows:
vBESS = vOC −iBESS RBESS (19)
where vBESS is the output voltage, RBESS is the battery re-
sistance, iBESS is the delivered current, and vOC is the battery
characteristic open circuit voltage.
The voltage,VBESS is passed to a boost converter to regulate
the voltage, vDC across the capacitor CDC , which forms the
voltage source for the inverter. The dc-side system block depicts
the boost converter and battery control block diagram. The
dynamical equations are
˙χ= v∗
DC −vDC (20)
iref = ki
V,DCχ+kp
V,DC ˙χ (21)
˙η= iref −iin (22)
u = ki
i,DCη+kp
i,DC ˙η (23)
whereχ,ki
V,DC , andkp
V,DC are the integrator state, integral gain,
and proportional gain of the dc voltage controller, respectively.
iref is limited to ||iref|| ≤irate . η, ki
i,DC , and ki
i,DC are the
integrator state, integral gain, and proportional gain of the dc
current controller, respectively. The output from the dc voltage
controller, is limited to a range of values between [0.05, 0.90].
The inverter operation is impeded by the dc side dynamics when
the 2-norm of the commanded voltages (||vdq
i,∗||2) exceeds vDC ,
indicating saturation. This is modeled by scaling vdq
i,∗based on
the minimum function between the 2-norm of vdq
i,∗and vDC ,a s
in (24) [27]
vdq
i,sat =
(
min{||vdq
i,∗||2,vDC}
||vdq
i,∗||2
)
vdq
i,∗ (24)
||vdq
i,∗||2 =
√
(vd
i,∗)2 +(vq
i,∗)2 (25)
wherevdq
i,sat is the implemented voltage command, and vd
i,∗and
vq
i,∗are thed- andq-axes components of the voltage commands,
respectively. Note thatvdq
i,sat = vdq
i,∗whenvDC exceeds||vdq
i,∗||2.
The dc–ac coupling variable is vdq
i,sat, which is applied to the
voltage sourcevi, shown in the voltage implementation panel of
Fig. 3.
B. Synchronous Generator
The SG is a well documented device; see [19] and [28] for
in-depth discussions. In the EMT modeling of the SG, all three
distinct components are modeled: 1) the machine; 2) the exciter;
and 3) the governor/turbine. The fundamental machine model is
a set of differential current elements in the dq frame expressed
as a function of ﬂux linkages and applied voltages [29].T h e
machines in this study are established with two q-axis damper
windings, consistent with the round-rotor implementation. The
swing equation is depicted once again with damping for trans-
parency
˙δG = ωG −ωs (26)
˙ωG = 1
M
(
pm,G −pe,G −D˙δG
)
(27)
whereD is the damper winding component.
The exciter is based on the IEEE Type-1 model. The saturation
function is an exponential of the form: SE(Efd)= γeϵEfd .
No derivative gains or derivative feedback are modeled. The
governor/turbine model used here is a simple representation that
acts on speed (frequency) errors [19]. The model consists of two
cascaded low-pass ﬁlters (τ= 0.5 s) and associated with output
limiters.
C. Simulation Statistics
The system equivalent inertia ( H) is deﬁned based on the
relative ratings of the devices as follows:
H =
∑n
i=1(Hi ∗SR,i)∑n
i=1 SR,i
(28)
whereHi is the inertia rating (in s)o fd e v i c ei,SR,i is the MV A
rating of device i, and n is the number of devices. For a GFM,
H =0 . Unless otherwise speciﬁed, the frequency of the system
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:51:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 6 =====
KENYON et al.: INTERACTIVE POWER TO FREQUENCY DYNAMICS BETWEEN GRID-FORMING INVERTERS 3461
Fig. 4. Frequency and power responses of isolated GFM and SG devices
following a 0.1 pu load step. (a) Frequency response. (b) Power response.
under inspection is the weighted frequency of all devices, which
is calculated according to
f(t)=
∑n
i=1(fi(t)∗SR,i)∑n
i=1 SR,i
(29)
wherefi(t) is the frequency of devicei at timet. This weighted
frequency is used to determine the ROCOF and nadir values.
The ROCOF is deﬁned as
˙f(t)= f(t+TR)−f(t)
TR
(30)
where f is the frequency, and TR is the size, in seconds, of the
sliding averaging window. A TR = 100 mswindow is used, in
accordance with [30]. The nadir is deﬁned asmin{f(t)}, where
t>t perturbation ; i.e., the lowest frequency post disturbance.
The matrix pencil method [31] is used to calculate the frequency
(ωk) and decay ( λk) of the modes of f(t). The damping factor
of mode k isζk = λk√
λ2
k +ω2
k
.
IV . NUMERICAL ANAL YSISRESULTS
This section presents the results of numerical analysis with
EMT simulations at the device- and network-level using power
system computer aided design (PSCAD) [29]. The devices and
networks are available open source at [32].
A. Device-Level Dynamics
The individual device step responses are presented followed
by the direct interaction of the two devices as analyzed on a
three-bus system, demonstrating the interrelated dynamics. The
device-level analysis is concluded with an investigation into the
impacts of the dc-side dynamical system, and simulations with
the nonlinear frequency control functions.
1) Device Step Response: To verify the analytical ﬁndings
and conclusions of Section II, the frequency response of the SG
and GFM following a load perturbation is simulated. For this
analysis, each device is isolated, dispatched at 0.5 p.u. with a
constant power load connected directly to the terminals.
The frequency and power step response of each device for
a 0.1 pu load step are presented in Fig. 4. The SG frequency
trace in Fig. 4(a) shows the second-order negative step response
following the load step with overshoot and subsequent damped
oscillations that settle to the droop determined steady state. The
GFM frequency trace follows a ﬁrst-order response; there is no
overshoot and a far smaller response time as compared to the
SG. This result is due in part to the faster response of the GFM,
but primarily a dynamical system order reduction. A summary
of the nadir, settling frequency, and ROCOF are presented in
TABLE II
SINGLE DEVICE STEP RESPONSE RESULTS
TABLE III
TWO GENERA TORSYSTEM RESULTS
Table II. Note the inverse proportionality between inertia and
ROCOF and the correlation between a lower nadir and reduced
inertia for SGs, contrasted with the larger ROCOF of the GFM
device, but a resultant higher nadir.
Thepe andpm responses of each device are presented in Fig.
4(b). Note that the pe response is identical for each device; the
electrical power is primarily determined by network changes
with the output voltage held nearly constant. The ﬁrst-order
relation of pm,I and pe,G is evident in the GFM traces, which
manifest at a faster rate than the higher order SG response, cor-
roborating the timescale separation criteria for the singular per-
turbation application. Thepm,G follows a second-order response
complete with overshoot, oscillations, initial acceleration, and
inﬂection change.
2) Two-Generator System: A simple two generator radial test
system was constructed with only a single GFM (bus 1) and a
single SG (bus 3) at two ends and a single load (bus 2) in the
middle, connected by equal impedance lines ( XT =0 .025+
j0.125). A set of 11 simulations were performed, wherein the
aggregate rating of the devices was maintained at 30 MV A to
sweep the system equivalent inertia (H) space from 4.0 to 0.0 s.
Table III provides these device ratings and respective inertia.
These rating ratios will match the aggregate inertia ratings for
the 39-bus system simulation scenarios in Section IV -B2.T h e
devices are dispatched at 0.5 pu relative to the device rating, and
the perturbation is a 0.1 pu load step relative to the 30 MV A total
of the system.
The frequency results presented in Table III are for the SG
alone (except for the ﬁnal row), to highlight the impact of
the GFM on the SG operation. There is a clear shift with a
growing GFM ratio to an increase in ROCOF, accompanied
by a rising nadir. Fig. 5 shows the SG frequency for a few
of these cases, where it is evident that substantial damping is
afforded to the SG response, until the SG represents only a small
portion of the system machine rating (i.e., <20%). When the
SG rating is 3 MV A, and the GFM is rated at 27 MV A, a high
frequency (2.9 Hz) oscillatory mode is present that dampens
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:51:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 7 =====
3462 IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL. 17, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023
Fig. 5. Frequency response of the synchronous generator (SG) from the two
generator test system with a GFM, SG, and load.
out within a few cycles. This oscillatory mode is present only
as rapid variations in pe,G; pm,G does not change within the
time frame of this oscillatory response. This mode is much
faster than the 0.23 Hz oscillatory mode dominating the SG
only simulation (SG: 30 MV A). The primary takeaway is that
for low levels of SGs as compared to GFMs, with respect to
total rating, high frequency oscillatory modes are excited in the
SG rotors. The anticipated cause for these modes is the result
of rapid power ﬂow differentials generated on the network by
the rapid GFM frequency change. This will incur a substantial
pe,G −pm,G differential on the SG, that when matched with the
low inertia, would result in these higher frequency oscillatory
modes. Similar tests with the AC1A exciter yielded no difference
in these simulation results, with the response of the exciter being
substantially faster than the active power transfer dynamics of
the GFM and SG. Different governor models, such as GGOV1,
TGOV1, and GAST were simulated, but with lower frequency
bandwidths below the oscillatory mode, no impact was expected
or observed. Further investigation into the root cause of these
oscillatory modes is a prime topic for future research.
3) Impact of DC-Side Dynamics: In Section II, it was as-
sumed that pm,I is immediately available to the GFM upon
changes inpe,I . This assumption is based on the suitable opera-
tion of the dc-side system, which is predicated on the appropriate
device size selection and boost converter operation. This system
is now analyzed to conﬁrm the assumption. To determine an
appropriate capacity of the dc-link capacitor ( CDC ), and a
suitable dc-link voltage across the capacitor ( VDC ), a compu-
tational sensitivity analysis was performed. The capacitor sizes
investigated represent either 0.1, or 1 cycle’s worth of energy
contained at the rated inverter power and voltage. The capacitor
rating is determined as follows:
CDC = 2SRα
V 2
DC
(31)
whereSR is the device rating andαrepresents the time duration
based on the cycles of rated power. At a minimum, the VDC
must span the positive and negative peaks of the inverter output.
Namely, VDC >V base,l−l
√
8/3. Factoring in the anticipated
operation of the inverter above rated voltage, in this case it is
assumed 1.05 pu, the target VDC can be represented as in the
following:
VDC =1 .05
√
8/3Vbase,l−lΔV (32)
where ΔV is a parameter that represents the setpoint overage
above the requisite voltage. The parameter sweep is an executed
0.5 pu load step, with an initial dispatch at 0.05 pu, on an
isolated GFM inverter for six different value combinations of
TABLE IV
DC SIDE ENERGY DIFFERENCE—THE RESULTANT Edif f VALUES ARE
EXPRESSED IN PER UNIT *S ECONDS
Fig. 6. Frequency of the SG on the 3-bus system for various frequency droop
functions of the GFM.
TABLE V
NONLINEAR DROOP
CDC and ΔV . The per unit power differential between the no
dc dynamics (pnoDC ) and the resultant power with the speciﬁc
parameters (pDC ) is integrated (discretely) across the length of
the simulation, Ediff = ∑(pnoDC −pDC)Δt, to quantify the
impacts of the dc side dynamics. These results are shown in
Table IV, where it is evident that for both voltage buffers of
ΔV =5 %and ΔV = 10%, the differential is very small; it is
effectively zero when the capacitor is rated for one electrical
cycle and ΔV = 10%. In simulations where Ediff ̸=0 ,t h e
difference persists for less than 200 ms. Subsequently, the dc
side values of CDC =1 cycle and ΔV = 10% are selected
to support the immediate availability of preconverter power
assumed in the analysis of Section II. Having concluded on
this appropriate assumption, dc side dynamics were disabled in
the following simulations to reduce computational burden and
improve simulation time.
4) Nonlinear Frequency Control: Test results with the non-
linear frequency functions from Section II-D are presented
here, with the function parameters as presented in Table I.T h e
three-bus system is used, where the SG is rated at 30 MV A and
dispatched at 0.5 per unit, and the GFM is rated at 15 MV A
and dispatched at 0.1 per unit. A 2.5 MW load step at bus 3
is executed. The frequency responses presented in Fig. 6, with
statistics in Table V, are derived from the rotational velocity
of the SG. All three nonlinear functions present improved fre-
quency dynamics, both in the nadir and ROCOF, as compared to
the linear function, while the primary oscillatory mode exhibits
better damping with all of the nonlinear responses.
The per unit power deviations of each device, for each of
the four functions, is shown in Fig. 7. It is clear that each of the
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:51:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 8 =====
KENYON et al.: INTERACTIVE POWER TO FREQUENCY DYNAMICS BETWEEN GRID-FORMING INVERTERS 3463
Fig. 7. Power output of the SG and GFM inverter for various nonlinear droop
gains.
TABLE VI
9-BUS CONFIGURA TION AND RESULTS
nonlinear functions permit a larger delivery of active power to the
network than the linear function result. The exponential function
shows the smallest component of high frequency oscillations im-
mediately after the disturbance, with the power function showing
the largest amount. These test results indicate the potential for
various nonlinear functions to be used for GFM control in future
power systems. Clearly, power is not shared equitably between
the devices after this initial primary frequency response, but
this deviation would be ameliorated by the autonomous power
sharing controller ﬁrst presented in [24]. The application of this
secondary controller is beyond the scope of this work. Overall,
the results demonstrate the promise that nonlinear functions have
to offer for improving primary frequency response.
B. Network-Level Dynamics
Now, the network level numerical analysis results from simu-
lations with the the IEEE 9- and 39-bus test systems in the EMT
domain are presented.
1) Test Case I: IEEE 9-Bus System: Simulations on the IEEE
9-bus test system [32], [33], consisted of a 0.1 pu load step (31.5
MW, 11.5 MV ar) at bus 6. Interconnection scenarios of SGs and
GFMs are created by systematically supplanting an SG with a
GFM, as shown in Table VI.
The results for four simulations (scenarios A, B, C, and
D—dispatch in Table VI) show that as the mechanical inertia
is decreased, the nadir is raised while the ROCOF increases,
which is indicative of the dominant ﬁrst-order response of the
additional GFMs. The system frequency oscillation period with
all SGs (Scenario A) matches the single machine step response;
i.e., 0.4 Hz oscillations. By inspection of Fig. 8, showing the
individual device frequencies for each Scenario, the dominant
oscillatory mode increases in frequency with more GFMs. The
Fig. 8. IEEE 9-bus average system frequency response for varied quantities
of GFM/SGs.
Fig. 9. Initial frequency response of each device for the four simulated
scenarios on the 9-bus system.
damping ratio from Table VI shows a clear increase as the
converters are changed to GFMs.
In Scenario A, all three SGs have similar frequency tra-
jectories, as the three devices maintain broad synchronization
following the perturbation. Herein lies the motivation for the
center of inertia frequency metric, which assumes similar fre-
quency trajectories of all devices [19]. The Scenario B system
frequency is second order with a damping value around 50%;
the dominant mode damping is increased according to Table VI.
From Fig. 9, it is obvious that the three devices are not broadly
synchronized immediately following the disturbance. Scenario
C frequency exhibits overshoot, but a quasi-ﬁrst-order recovery;
i.e., the concavity in the green trace from t = 1.5–2.5 s is the
inverse of the expected second-order recovery. The GFM device
frequencies change too rapidly for the devices to remain loosely
synchronized during the ﬁrst 0.5 s following the perturbation.
With all GFM devices (D), the system frequency follows a
ﬁrst-order response with overshoot and frequency oscillations
absent.
The pe and pm response for each scenario are presented
in Fig. 10. The electrical powers show inter-area oscillations
(f =1 .6 Hz) between SG 1 and SG 2 in Scenario A. Note
the time separation between these pe,G oscillations and pm,G.
Scenario B shows the very rapid changes in pm,I –pe,I (these
are indistinguishable at this temporal resolution) of GFM 1,
which exacerbates a larger peak pe,G of SG 2 and 3, while the
subsequent oscillations are more damped. The peak pe,G output
of SG 3 in Scenario C is further increased, although there are no
oscillations following this overshoot. The conclusion is that the
rapid frequency changes of the GFMs, evident in Fig.9, cause the
network conditions to change rapidly, while the SG frequency
follows the slower second-order response resulting in a larger
pe,G extraction; the fast frequency change of the GFM forces a
larger power change in the SG, aggravating larger oscillations.
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:51:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 9 =====
3464 IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL. 17, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023
Fig. 10. Comparison of preconverter and electrical powers of each device for
the four 9-bus simulation scenarios.
TABLE VII
39-BUS CONFIGURA TION AND RESULTS
This large pe,G excursion corroborates the hypothesis from
Section IV -A2of an increasing extraction of SG energy when
the rating ratio is low compared to shares of GFMs. Scenario
D power outputs show a reduction in power oscillations with
minimal overshoot and a rapid arrival to settling outputs.
The results from the 9-bus system suggest that the presence
of GFM inverters reduces the average system frequency nadir,
while increasing ROCOF. Additionally, dominant oscillatory
mode analysis indicates a monotonic increase in damping with
more GFMs, contrary to Section IV -A2.
2) Test Case II: IEEE 39-Bus System: The IEEE 39-bus test
system [34] is presented as a larger case study. Supporting
Python code and details about this model are available open-
source at [32]. All ten initial SG devices are systematically
replaced by GFMs, with a scenario deﬁning each replacement;
i.e., scenarios 0–10 in Table VII. The 0.1 pu load step (600
MW/140 Mvar) occurs at bus 15.
The results suggest the existence of broad similarities to the
9-bus results, with a substantial reduction in overshoot following
the transition to a GFM dominated system. The inverted period
within the initial deceleration occurs at higher average frequency
values with a larger quantity of GFM devices. Portraits of the
f –pm,I trajectories for a selection of 39-bus system simulations
are presented in Fig. 11, where the subtitles correspond with the
Table VII entry. With no GFMs, the SGs follow the trajectory
of an initial frequency deviation prior to preconverter changes.
Prior to convergence on the steady-state values, the trajectories
exhibit oscillations in the form of converging spirals. With half
GFMs in scenario 5, the algebraic relation between frequency
Fig. 11. Frequency-power portraits of each device for scenario 0, 7, 9, and 10
for the 10% load step on the 39-bus test system.
and preconverter power is evident, while the SG trajectories are
shortened with less overshoot. With only a single SG online
in scenario 9, the SG exhibits no pre-converter power over-
shoot; however, substantial frequency oscillations are present,
of a higher frequency as conﬁrmed by the change in primary
mode frequency. In scenario 10 with all GFMs online, system
trajectory exhibits an order reduction to a ﬁrst-order response.
The frequency statistics presented in Table VII show that
while ROCOF increases with larger quantities of GFMs and
a resultant decrease in system mechanical inertia, the nadir is
simultaneously raised; the average frequency trajectories expose
a transition to a ﬁrst-order response. Also presented in TableVII
is the damping and frequency of the primary mode of the average
frequency for each scenario. It is apparent that as the ﬁrst half
of converters are swapped from SGs to GFMs, there is a large
increase in damping of the primary mode, while the frequency
of the primary mode sees a small increase. The monotonicity of
these progressions ends beyond Scenario 7, where a substantial
increase in mode frequency is present with greatly varying levels
of damping. In fact, contrary to the steady increase in damping
seen in the 9-bus system simulations, a substantial decrease in
damping can be seen with only a few SGs remaining, though
at a greatly increased dominant mode frequency. From Fig. 11,
Scenario 9, a larger number of distinct oscillations are seen in the
remaining SG. The presence of a large number of ﬁrst-order de-
vices is exacerbating the second-order response of the remaining
SGs. The results from this Section and Section IV -A2indicate
that neither the network nor the quantity of the devices plays a
role in these high frequency modes present during times of low
SG rating ratios.
V. R EAL-WORLD POWER SYSTEM:M AUI ISLAND
In this section, a validated power system model of the Hawai-
ian Island of Maui is simulated to identify the transition tra-
jectory to a ﬁrst-order frequency response with a GFM device
in a real-world system. The Maui power system (see Fig. 12)
has a near 200 MW peak demand, 69 kV mesh network that
has a variety of generation resources including synchronous
generators, synchronous condensers, type 3 and 4 wind plants,
hybrid power plants (HPPs), battery energy storage systems
(BESSs), utility solar plants, and distributed generation (DG)
in excess of 50% of demand at peak output. This model has
been developed in PSCAD, validated against ﬁeld data, and
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:51:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 10 =====
KENYON et al.: INTERACTIVE POWER TO FREQUENCY DYNAMICS BETWEEN GRID-FORMING INVERTERS 3465
Fig. 12. Reduced representation of the Maui power system [3].
TABLE VIII
SUMMARY OF MAUI REGION RESOURCES FOR STUDIED DISPA TCH;
DISTRIBUTED GENERA TION(DG), BA TTERYENERGY STORAGE SYSTEM
(BESS), HYBRID POWER PLANT (HPP)
parallelized on 32 cores to make simulations computationally
tractable [35]; it is one of the largest, validated full power system
EMT models to date. Here, the response of the Maui system to
a generation loss is compared with a single HPP operating in
GFL, or GFM mode.
The system attributes are highlighted in Table VIII. With IBR
penetration deﬁned asη= PIBR/PTot , the considered dispatch
is 96% IBRs with PIBR = 140.2 MW and PTot = 145.9 MW.
With a large number of synchronous condensers online, the sys-
tem equivalent inertia of the dispatch is H = 0.97 s. There are
two 30 MV A HPPs colocated at bus 502 in the Maalaea region,
which are conﬁgured as GFL devices with frequency-droop (4%)
grid support, each dispatched at 2.85 MW. Two simulations are
executed at this dispatch, to depict the impacts of a GFM device
on the Maui network. The ﬁrst simulation has all HPPs as GFL
devices with grid support, which is referred to as the base-case.
The second simulation has a single HPP at bus 502 converted
to GFM control; this case is referred to as the GFM-case.T h e
perturbation on the system is the disconnection of both type 4
wind plants, which share a common point of coupling, for a loss
of 21 MW, equating to 15% of total generation.
The rotational speed of SG 501a is scaled to Hz, and presented
as a proxy for the frequency response of the system for both
simulations in Fig. 13. The ROCOF and nadir for the base-case
are 6.7 Hz/s and 58.7 Hz, respectively. In the GFM-case, there
Fig. 13. Frequency response of SG 501a for the base-case and GFM-case
simulations.
Fig. 14. Active power response of two HPPs and SG 501a. (a) Base-case. (b)
GFM-case.
is a clear improvement in the frequency response, evidenced
by improved damping of the SG response, a less deviant nadir
of 59.35 Hz, and a ROCOF of 3.7 Hz/s. As expected from
the previous derivations and simulation results, the frequency
response with a single GFM device online shows the trend of a
transition toward a ﬁrst-order response.
The active power response of SG 501a and the two HPP units
is presented for each simulation in Fig. 14(a) and (b).I nt h e
base-case, the responses of the HPPs are nearly identical as
both devices are in GFLM mode operating under a frequency
droop grid-supporting control strategy. There are high frequency
oscillations present, primarily in the SG response. With HPPa
switched to a droop controlled GFM, the immediate ( < 0.5 s)
response of the SG and GFM HPP are similar, because both
devices are regulating the local voltage, with the result a power
extraction from the network as opposed to controller driven
power injections. The peak power extraction from the SG is
reduced by 50%, from 0.5 pu in the base-case, to 0.25 pu in the
GFM-case. Improved damping of the high frequency mode of
the SG present in Fig. 14(a), and the low frequency mode of
the frequency response in Fig. 13 is evident in the active power
output traces.
The mode switch of a single HPP on the validated Maui model
from GFL to GFM during a period of very high instantaneous
shares of IBRs operating as GFLs is highly beneﬁcial to the
frequency stability of the system. The impacts of a very large
generation loss are mitigated with the single GFM, as the system
frequency shows damping on multiple oscillatory modes, while
the frequency response displays the trend toward a ﬁrst-order
system as previously discussed and demonstrated on the test
systems.
VI. D ISCUSSION
For devices that adjust preconverter power as a function of
frequency changes such as SGs, a larger ROCOF generally
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:51:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 11 =====
3466 IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL. 17, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023
yields a deeper nadir for the same magnitude power imbal-
ance [30]. Consider the approximating equation Δfprior =
αROCOF ×tresponse whereΔfprior is the frequency deviation
prior to substantivepm,G changes,αROCOF is the ROCOF for a
generic system, andtresponse is the preconverter power response
time [as used in (2) and (5)]. A relatively larger ROCOF for
the same tresponse [such as τG,i n (5)] yields a larger Δfprior
prior to substantial pm changes. This is the inertial response
period when rotational kinetic energy ( Eint,G) is extracted
from the SGs; in SG dominated systems, less inertia yields
largerαROCOF values, increasing susceptibility to lower nadirs
that can trigger frequency load shedding [36]. This behavior
has been highlighted as exacerbated by inverter dominated
systems [17].
Due to the control design, the GFM relation is Δfprior =0 ;
after pe,I changes due to varying network conditions, pm,I is
matched prior to any change in frequency. The GFM changes
frequency according to a control objective, not rotational kine-
matics and frequency-triggered governor action to match pe,G
and pm,G. Given this ﬂexibility, the preconverter-frequency
relationship can be of a lower order with GFMs, and potentially
redeﬁne the frequency response in GFM dominated systems.
Here, it is noted that there are potential broader issues due to
larger ROCOFs, such as relay tripping, device disconnection,
and machine shaft strain. While the analysis of these consid-
erations is beyond the scope of this work, it is noted that the
nonlinear droop functions presented in Section II-D, which
maintain a ﬁrst-order response, reduced the ROCOF in all cases,
while improving headroom utilization.
An unusual phenomenon was uncovered in the two generator
system, where for very low levels of SGs as a rating ratio (i.e.,
when the rating of the SG was <20% of the total system online
generation), a previously unreported high frequency oscillatory
mode was observed. This mode was uncovered in the two
generator system and also observed in the 39-bus system with
ten generators, where similar rating ratios could be realized by
binary dispatch changes where a generator is either a GFM or
SG. That the mode exists in both of these systems indicates that it
is not a function of generator quantity nor network interactions; it
is likely the result of the rapid frequency change of GFMs, which
places a substantial pe,G differential on the small amount of
inertia remaining on the system. Interestingly, while it is caused
by the rapid change in frequency of the GFMs, the GFMs are
also the source of damping in the system as no substantial pm,G
changes are observed prior to the oscillatory mode dampening
out. This observation is generally contradictory to the claim
of a trend of increased damping with GFM devices [4], [14],
in that there is evidently an inversion in this damping when
GFMs are the dominant resource in a heterogeneous system.
This oscillatory mode was not observed in the 9-bus system
because the discrete variation of generators did not yield this
lower rating ratio (<20%).
VII. C ONCLUSION
This article investigated the active power-frequency conver-
sion dynamics of the synchronous generator and the droop
controlled grid-forming inverter and the associated power sys-
tem frequency impacts due to the device disparities. Analysis
highlighted the lower order frequency dynamics and the in-
verted frequency regulation of grid-forming inverters, as com-
pared to synchronous generators, which laid the framework for
the introduction of novel, nonlinear frequency droop control
concepts. Electro-magnetic transient simulations at the device
level with full order models conﬁrmed this power-frequency
order reduction, while investigation into the dc-side dynamics
concluded on a negligible impact with proper design, which
supports the approximation of a near immediate throughput
active power capability of grid-forming devices. Nonlinear
droop simulations yielded improved frequency dynamics, en-
couraging further work in this ﬁeld. Network-level simulations
of IEEE standard test cases supported the analytical results,
and those with a validated model of the Maui power system
corroborated the transition toward ﬁrst-order frequency dynam-
ics with a single grid-forming inverter. This article sets the
basis for novel, nonlinear control of grid-forming inverters to
redeﬁne the foundations of frequency stability in future bulk
power systems, while recognizing that questions remain be-
fore such technologies may be implemented in future power
systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank J. D. Lara and R. Henriquez-
Auba of the University of California Berkeley for their insightful
discussions and comments. This work was authored in part
by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, operated by
Alliance for Sustainable Energy, LLC, for the U.S. Department
of Energy (DOE) under Contract No. DE-AC36-08GO28308.
Funding provided by the Department of Energy Ofﬁce of Energy
Efﬁciency & Renewable Energy. The views expressed herein
do not necessarily represent the views of the DOE or the U.S.
Government.
REFERENCES
[1] R. W. Kenyon et al., “Stability and control of power systems with high
penetrations of inverter-based resources: An accessible review of current
knowledge and open questions,”Sol. Energy, vol. 210, pp. 149–168, 2020.
[2] North American Electric Reliability Corporation, “Integrating inverter
based resources into low short circuit strength systems,” Atlanta, GA,
USA, NERC Reliability Guideline, Dec. 2017.
[3] R. W. Kenyon, A. Sajadi, A. Hoke, and B.-M. Hodge, “Criticality of
inverter controller order in power system dynamic studies – Case study:
Maui island,” Elect. Power Syst. Res., vol. 214, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 108789.
[4] A. Sajadi, R. W. Kenyon, and B.-M. Hodge, “Synchronization in electric
power networks with inherent heterogeneity up to 100% inverter-based
renewable generation,” Nature Commun. , vol. 13, no. 1, May 2022,
Art. no. 2490.
[5] P . Piagi and R. H. Lasseter, “Autonomous control of microgrids,” in Proc.
IEEE Power Eng. Soc. Gen. Meeting , 2006, Art. no. 8.
[6] North American Electric Reliability Corporation, “Grid forming technol-
ogy: Bulk power system reliability considerations,” Atlanta, GA, USA,
NERC Reliability Guideline, Dec. 2021.
[7] F. Milano, F. Dörﬂer, G. Hug, D. J. Hill, and G. V erbiˇc, “Foundations and
challenges of low-inertia systems,” in Proc. Power Syst. Comput. Conf. ,
2018, pp. 1–25.
[8] A. Sajadi, J. P . Ranola, R. W. Kenyon, B. M. Hodge, and B. Mather,
“Electric power industry challenges due to increasing shares of inverter-
based resources in power systems,” in Proc. IEEE PES Innov. Smart Grid
Technol. Conf. Eur .. Novi Sad, Serbia, 2022, pp. 1–5.
[9] T. Qoria, Q. Cossart, C. Li, X. Guillaud, F. Gruson, and X. Kestelyn,
“Deliverable 3.2: Local control and simulation tools for large transmis-
sion systems,” MIGRA TE, Bayreuth, Germany, Tech. Rep. 66528683,
Dec. 2018.
[10] U. Markovic, O. Stanojev, P . Aristidou, E. Vrettos, D. S. Callaway, and G.
Hug, “Understanding small-signal stability of low-inertia systems,” IEEE
Trans. Power Syst., vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 3997–4017, Sep. 2021.
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:51:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 12 =====
KENYON et al.: INTERACTIVE POWER TO FREQUENCY DYNAMICS BETWEEN GRID-FORMING INVERTERS 3467
[11] M. M. S. Khan, Y . Lin, B. Johnson, V . Purba, M. Sinha, and S. Dhople, “A
reduced-order aggregated model for parallel inverter systems with virtual
oscillator control,” in Proc. IEEE 19th Workshop Control Model. Power
Electron., 2018, pp. 1–6.
[12] A. Tayyebi, D. Groß, A. Anta, F. Kupzog, and F. Dörﬂer, “Frequency sta-
bility of synchronous machines and grid-forming power converters,”IEEE
Trans. Emerg. Sel. Topics Power Electron., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1004–1018,
Jun. 2020.
[13] M. E. Elkhatib, W. Du, and R. H. Lasseter, “Evaluation of inverter-based
grid frequency support using frequency-watt and grid-forming PV invert-
ers,” in Proc. IEEE Power Energy Soc. Gen. Meeting , 2018, pp. 1–5.
[14] R. H. Lasseter, Z. Chen, and D. Pattabiraman, “Grid-forming inverters: A
critical asset for the power grid,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Sel. Topics Power
Electron., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 925–935, Jun. 2020.
[15] Y . Lin et al., “Research roadmap on grid-forming inverters,” National
Renewable Energy Lab., Golden, CO, USA, Tech. Rep. NREL/TP-5D00-
73476, 2020.
[16] R. W. Kenyon, A. Sajadi, A. Hoke, and B.-M. Hodge, “Open-source
PSCAD grid-following and grid-forming inverters and a benchmark for
zero-inertia power system simulations,” in Proc. IEEE Kansas Power
Energy Conf., 2021, pp. 1–6.
[17] A. Ulbig, T. S. Borsche, and G. Andersson, “Impact of low rotational
inertia on power system stability and operation,” IF AC Proc. V ol., vol. 47,
no. 3, pp. 7290–7297, Jan. 2014.
[18] P . Tielens and D. V an Hertem, “The relevance of inertia in power systems,”
Renewable Sustain. Energy Rev., vol. 55, pp. 999–1009, Mar. 2016.
[19] P . W. Sauer, M. A. Pai, and J. H. Chow, Power System Dynamics and
Stability: With Synchrophasor Measurement and Power System Toolbox ,
2nd ed. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2017.
[20] H. Beck and R. Hesse, “Virtual synchronous machine,” in Proc. 9th Int.
Conf. Elect. Power Qual. Utilisation , 2007, pp. 1–6.
[21] B. B. Johnson, M. Sinha, N. G. Ainsworth, F. Dörﬂer, and S. V . Dhople,
“Synthesizing virtual oscillators to control islanded inverters,”IEEE Trans.
Power Electron., vol. 31, no. 8, pp. 6002–6015, Aug. 2016.
[22] C. Arghir, T. Jouini, and F. Dörﬂer, “Grid-forming control for power
converters based on matching of synchronous machines,” Automatica,
vol. 95, pp. 273–282, Sep. 2018.
[23] J. H. Chow, J. R. Winkelman, M. A. Pai, and P . W. Sauer, “Singular
perturbation analysis of large-scale power systems,” Int. J. Elect. Power
Energy Syst., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 117–126, Apr. 1990.
[24] R. W. Kenyon, A. Sajadi, and B.-M. Hodge, “Droop-e: Exponential droop
as a function of power output for grid-forming inverters with autonomous
power sharing,” in Proc. 11th Bulk Power Syst. Dyn. Control Symp., 2022,
pp. 1–11.
[25] R. W. Erickson and D. Maksimovic, Fundamentals of Power Electronics,
2nd ed. Berlin, Germany: Springer, May 2007.
[26] R. H. Park, “Two-reaction theory of synchronous machines generalized
method of analysis-part I,” Trans. Amer . Inst. Elect. Eng., vol. 48, no. 3,
pp. 716–727, Jul. 1929.
[27] C. Roberts, J. D. Lara, R. Henriquez-Auba, B. K. Poolla, and D. S. Call-
away, “Grid-coupled dynamic response of battery-driven voltage source
converters,” inProc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Control, Comput. Technol.
Smart Grids, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[28] J. Machowski, J. W. Bialek, and J. R. Bumby, Power System Dynamics:
Stability and Control. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2008.
[29] Manitoba hydro International Ltd, “Power systems computer aided de-
sign,” Accessed: Jan. 14, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.mhi.ca/
products/pscad
[30] North American Electric Reliability Corporation, “Fast Frequency re-
sponse concepts and bulk power system reliability needs,” Inverter-Based
Resource Performance Task Force, Atlanta, GA, USA, NERC Reliability
Guideline, Mar. 2020.
[31] T. Sarkar and O. Pereira, “Using the matrix pencil method to estimate the
parameters of a sum of complex exponentials,” IEEE Antennas Propag.
Mag., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 48–55, Feb. 1995.
[32] R. W. Kenyon, “PyPSCAD,” Golden, CO, USA, Nov. 2020. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/NREL/PyPSCAD
[33] Manitoba Hydro International Ltd, “PSCAD: IEEE 9 bus system,”
Accessed: Nov. 03, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.pscad.com/
knowledge-base/article/25
[34] Manitoba Hydro International Ltd, “IEEE 39 bus system,” Accessed: Jan.
14, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.pscad.com/knowledge-base/
article/28
[35] R. W. Kenyon, B. Wang, A. Hoke, J. Tan, C. Antonio, and B.-M. Hodge,
“V alidation of maui PSCAD model: Motivation, methodology, and lessons
learned,” in Proc. 52nd North Amer . Power Symp., 2021, pp. 1–6.
[36] North American Electric Reliability Corporation, Standard PRC-006-2
Automatic Underfrequency Load Shedding . Atlanta, GA, USA: NERC,
Aug. 2017.
Rick Wallace Kenyon (Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in electrical, computer, and energy en-
gineering from the University of Colorado Boulder,
Boulder, CO, USA, in 2022.
He is the Power Systems Simulation Lead with
encoord, Denver, CO, USA, where he studies hybrid
simulation platforms for assessing the dynamic secu-
rity of power systems with large shares of renewable
resources. His main research interests include the
potential for nonlinear frequency control with grid-
forming control, to enable the decarbonization of the
grid.
Amirhossein Sajadi (Senior Member, IEEE) re-
ceived the Ph.D. degree in systems and control en-
gineering from Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH, USA, in 2016.
He is currently a Research Afﬁliate with the Re-
newable and Sustainable Energy Institute, Univer-
sity of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA. His
main research interests include modeling, planning,
dynamics, control, and management of large-scale
power systems, including renewable resources.
Matt Bossart (Student Member, IEEE) is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical, com-
puter, and energy engineering with the University of
Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA.
His main research interests include the dynamics
and control of large-scale inverter-based power sys-
tems, and the use of data-driven models and tech-
niques to enable high ﬁdelity simulation of large
systems.
Anderson Hoke (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical, computer,
and energy engineering from the University of Col-
orado, Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA, in 2013 and 2016.
He is a Principal Engineer with the Power Sys-
tems Engineering Center, National Renewable En-
ergy Laboratory, Golden, CO, USA. His research
interests include grid integration of power electronics
and inverter-based renewable and distributed energy.
Bri-Mathias Hodge (Senior Member, IEEE) re-
ceived the Ph.D. degree in chemical engineering from
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA, in 2010.
He is an Associate Professor with the Department
of Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering and
an Associate Director and Fellow of the Renew-
able and Sustainable Energy Institute, University of
Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA. He is also a
Chief Scientist and Distinguished Member of Re-
search Staff with the National Renewable Energy
Laboratory, Golden, CO, USA.
Authorized licensed use limited to: VinUni. Downloaded on August 24,2026 at 06:51:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 