
===== PAGE 1 =====
1736 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER DELIVERY , VOL. 39, NO. 3, JUNE 2024
Positive-Sequence Modeling of Droop-Controlled
Grid-Forming Inverters for Transient Stability
Simulation of Transmission Systems
Wei Du , Senior Member , IEEE, Quan H. Nguyen , Member , IEEE, Song Wang , Senior Member , IEEE,
Jinho Kim , Member , IEEE,Y u a nL i u , Member , IEEE, Songzhe Zhu , Senior Member , IEEE,
Francis K. Tuffner , Senior Member , IEEE, and Zhenyu Huang
Abstract—This article describes a positive-sequence model to
represent two widely reported droop-controlled grid-forming in-
verters for transmission system transient stability simulation stud-
ies. Methods of how to develop the equivalent voltage source behind
impedance to represent inverters with and without inner control
loops, modeling of P-f and Q-V droop controls, active and reactive
power limiting modeling, and modeling of fault current limiting
controls have been described in detail. The model was implemented
in commercially available positive-sequence simulation tools and
compared with detailed electromagnetic transient models in both
a single-grid-forming-inverter inﬁnite-bus system and a modiﬁed
IEEE 39-bus system. Finally, the model was tested on the U.S.
Western Interconnection system. The study results showed that the
model has a good level of accuracy compared to the detailed EMT
models, and at the same time also achieves a high computational
efﬁciency, making it suitable for large-scale transmission system
simulation studies.
Index Terms—Droop control, grid-forming inverter, modeling,
positive-sequence, transmission system, simulation.
I. I NTRODUCTION
T
HE grid-forming inverter (GFM) is considered a critical as-
set for power grids with a high penetration of inverter-based
resources [1]. This technology was ﬁrst used at low-voltage
levels such as microgrids [2], but has drawn a lot of attention at
Manuscript received 6 September 2023; revised 27 December 2023 and
16 February 2024; accepted 5 March 2024. Date of publication 18 March
2024; date of current version 23 May 2024. This work supported by the U.S.
Department of Energy’s Ofﬁce of Energy Efﬁciency and Renewable Energy
(EERE) through Solar Energy Technologies Ofﬁce (SETO) under Grant 38637.
The Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) is operated by Battelle for
the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract DE-AC05-76RL01830. Paper
no. TPWRD-01225-2023. (Corresponding author: Wei Du.)
Wei Du, Quan H. Nguyen, Jinho Kim, Y uan Liu, Francis K. Tuffner, and
Zhenyu Huang are with the Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory, Rich-
land, W A 99354 USA (e-mail: wei.du@pnnl.gov; quan.nguyen@pnnl.gov;
jinho.kim@pnnl.gov; yuan.liu@pnnl.gov; francis.tuffner@pnnl.gov; zhenyu.
huang@pnnl.gov).
Song Wang is with Portland General Electric, Portland, OR 97204 USA (e-
mail: song.wang@pgn.com).
Songzhe Zhu is with GridBright, Alamo, CA 94507 USA (e-mail:
songzhe.zhu@gridbright.com).
Color versions of one or more ﬁgures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPWRD.2024.3376245.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TPWRD.2024.3376245
transmission levels in recent years because of the rapid integra-
tion of renewables to the grid around the world [3].
Because a grid-forming inverter approximately behaves as a
voltage source behind impedance during normal operations, its
dynamic characteristic is fundamentally different from the con-
ventional current-controlled grid-following inverters. Numerous
research and ﬁeld demonstration projects have shown that such
voltage source characteristic of grid-forming inverters can bring
signiﬁcant beneﬁts to power systems at both the transmission
and distribution levels, which include improving the system
frequency response [4], [5], [6], increasing the system damping
[7], [8], being able to operate in very weak systems[9], providing
the black-start capability [9], [10], and enabling the system to
operate in the islanded mode [11], [12], [13].
Current research work primarily focuses on developing in-
novative controls to further improve the dynamic performance
of grid-forming inverters under various fault events and an-
alyzing the transient stability of power grids dominated by
grid-forming inverters. The work in [14] analyzed the transient
stability of droop-controlled grid-forming inverters when the
output currents are saturated and proposed a simple feedback
loop to improve the system transient stability by modifying the
inverter output frequency. The work in [15] and [16] investi-
gated the transient stability and critical clearing time of droop-
controlled grid-forming inverters using the virtual impedance
and current reference saturation as the current limiting algo-
rithms, respectively. The work in [17] outlined a stationary-
frame control architecture for grid-forming inverters to better
handle unbalanced faults. Reference [18] proposed a DQ-frame
asymmetrical virtual impedance control to enhance the transient
stability of droop-controlled grid-forming inverters. The work
in [19] proposed a system-level supervisory control that uses
low-bandwidth communication to pre-emptively assign a set of
local ride-through control parameters to individual grid-forming
inverters to guarantee the system transient stability.
Although many innovative controls are currently being pro-
posed for grid-forming inverters, less attention is paid to the
modeling of grid-forming inverters for the bulk power system
simulation studies. Electromagnetic transient (EMT) model-
ing and positive-sequence modeling are the two most popu-
lar methods to simulate the power system dynamic behaviors.
0885-8977 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 09:22:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 2 =====
DU et al.: POSITIVE-SEQUENCE MODELING OF DROOP-CONTROLLED GRID-FORMING INVERTERS FOR TRANSIENT STABILITY SIMULA TION 1737
Theoretically, the EMT model can capture all the dynamics of
an inverter, but it may not be suitable to simulate large-scale
power systems because of the high computational burden. In
contrast, the positive-sequence model is based on the phasor
assumption and can signiﬁcantly improve the computational
efﬁciency. In today’s utility industry, power system engineers
still heavily rely on the positive-sequence simulation tools
to study the dynamic behaviors of transmission systems due
to the scale of practical systems. Therefore, it is important to
develop the positive-sequence model of grid-forming inverters
and investigate how accurately the model can reﬂect the dynamic
behaviors of grid-forming inverters in the time frame of interest.
The work in [20] proposed to use the Thevenin voltage source
instead of an ideal current source to represent grid-following
inverters in the positive-sequence simulation tool, which im-
proved the convergence of the network solution. Reference [21]
performed a comprehensive comparative study of the EMT
and positive-sequence models of grid-following inverters and
provided simulation guidelines of grid-following inverters for
grid-integration studies. The work in [6] developed three-phase
phasor models of grid-forming and grid-following inverters to
study the dynamic behaviors of large-scale distribution sys-
tems, but the fault response of grid-forming inverters was not
modeled. References [22] and [23] developed positive-sequence
models of grid-forming inverters with and without considering
the dynamics of the dc bus respectively, but the comparison
with detailed EMT models was not presented. Reference [24]
modeled the virtual impedance control of a grid-forming inverter
in the phasor domain. Reference [25] developed reduced-order
models for grid-forming and grid-following inverters to study
the small signal stability and compared the results with the
full-order models. The work in[26] developed positive-sequence
and negative-sequence models of grid-forming inverters that
were mainly used for the power system protection scheme design
instead of dynamic simulation. Literature review revealed that
signiﬁcant work in the domain of positive-sequence modeling of
grid-forming inverters for transmission system transient stability
simulation studies is needed.
It is worth mentioning that although numerous recent studies
reported detailed EMT simulations [14], [15], [16], [19] to
examine the system transient stability, the analytical approaches
reported in those studies were still based on the phasor as-
sumption, which ignored the dynamics of the inverter fast inner
control loops and the dynamics of the network. This indicates
that it might be feasible to use the positive-sequence models
to accurately simulate the transient stability of power systems
dominated by grid-forming inverters.
This paper describes a positive-sequence model to represent
two widely reported droop-controlled grid-forming inverters for
the transmission system transient stability simulation studies.
Methods of how to develop the equivalent voltage source behind
impedance to represent inverters with and without inner control
loops, modeling of P-f and Q-V droop controls, active and
reactive power limiting modeling, and modeling of fault current
limiting controls are described in detail. The positive-sequence
model was validated against detailed EMT models in both a
single-GFM inﬁnite-bus system and a modiﬁed IEEE 39-bus
Fig. 1. Basic model of a grid-forming inverter.
system. Finally, the model was tested on the U.S. Western
Interconnection system. Study results showed that the model
has a good level of accuracy compared to the detailed EMT
models, and at the same time also achieves a high computational
efﬁciency, making it suitable for large-scale transmission system
simulation studies. Most parts of the model described in the
paper have been included in a generic library positive-sequence
grid-forming inverter model, REGFM_A1 [27], which was
recently adopted by the US Western Electricity Coordinating
Council (WECC) and included in the model libraries of major
commercial positive-sequence simulation tools, including PTI-
PSSE [28], GE-PSLF [29], PowerWorld Simulator [30], and
TSA T[31], marking the ﬁrst publicly available grid-forming
inverter model that is included in all major commercial transient
stability simulation tools used in North America.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II introduces the basic concept of grid-forming inverters.
Section III presents detailed EMT models of two widely reported
grid-forming droop controls. Section IV introduces the devel-
oped positive-sequence model and the interface to the network
solver. Sections V and VI present the comparison between the
positive-sequence model and the two detailed EMT models in
a single-GFM inﬁnite-bus system and a modiﬁed IEEE 39-bus
system, respectively. Section VII presents the case study on the
U.S. Western Interconnection system, and Section VIII draws
the conclusion of this paper.
II. G RID-FORMING CONCEPT
Unlike a grid-following inverter, which approximately be-
haves as a controllable current source, a grid-forming inverter
operates as a controllable voltage source behind impedance
during normal operations, as shown in Fig. 1.
If the coupling reactance XL is well designed, for example
between 0.05 pu and 0.2 pu on an inverter rating base, the inverter
output active power P is approximately linear with the phase
angle δP, and the inverter output reactive power Q is approx-
imately linear with the inverter internal voltage magnitude E,
according to (1)–(3). This decoupling characteristic simpliﬁes
the controller design.
δp = δE −δg (1)
P = EVg
XL
sinδp ≈EVg
XL
δp (2)
Q = E2 −EVg cosδp
XL
≈E(E −Vg )
XL
(3)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 09:22:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 3 =====
1738 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER DELIVERY, VOL. 39, NO. 3, JUNE 2024
Fig. 2. Dierct and multi-loop droop GFM controls. (a) Direct droop control. (b) Multi-loop droop control. (c) Equivalent circuit of the direct droop c ontrol in the
fundamental frequency. (d) Equivalent circuit of the multi-loop droop control in the fundamental frequency.
III. EMT M ODELS OF TWO WIDEL YUSED DROOP CONTROLS
Droop control is one of the most popular approaches to realize
the parallel operation of multiple grid-forming inverters [32].A
grid-forming inverter does not require the use of a phase-locked
loop (PLL) in comparison to its counterpart, the grid-following
inverter. This section introduces the detailed EMT models of two
widely reported grid-forming droop controls. A detailed descrip-
tion of the EMT models in this section makes it more convenient
for readers to understand how the positive-sequence model is
developed in Section IV by making appropriate assumptions. In
addition, as shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b), this paper assumes the
DC bus voltage is constant and ignores the dynamics at the DC
side.
A. Two Widely Used Grid-F orming Droop Controls
Historically, two types of grid-forming droop controls are
widely reported in the literature [33], which are deﬁned as the
direct droop control and the multi-loop droop control in this
paper, as shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b), respectively. As shown in
Fig. 2(a), the direct droop control directly regulates the angular
frequency ω and magnitude E of the modulation waveform
according to the P-f droop control and Q-V droop control,
respectively, where Pf and Qf are the active power and reactive
power ﬁltered by a ﬁrst-order low-pass ﬁlter as shown in (4).I n
contrast, for the multi-loop droop control, there are additional
cascaded inner voltage and current loops other than the P-f and
Q-V droop controls, as shown in Fig. 2(b). The purpose of the
cascaded inner voltage and current loops is to achieve fast control
of the waveform of the ﬁlter capacitor voltage vo. To achieve the
fast control ofvo, the bandwidths of the inner voltage and current
loops are typically designed to be very high. For example, the
bandwidths of the voltage and current loops used in [34] are
400 Hz and 1.6 kHz, respectively. With the waveform of vo
well controlled by the inner voltage and current loops, the P-f
and Q-V droop controls then regulate the angular frequency and
magnitude of vo in a relatively slow manner. The explanations
of all the variables and parameters are listed in Table I in this
section, and Table II in Section V, respectively.
Pf = 1
1+ Ts P, Q f = 1
1+ Ts Q (4)
Fig. 2(c) and (d) show the equivalent circuits of the two
controls in the fundamental frequency. For the direct droop
control, because it directly regulates the magnitude and angular
frequency of the modulation waveform, the equivalent circuit
can be represented by a voltage source behind impedances XL1
and XL2, as shown in Fig. 2(c). The pulse width modulation
(PWM) control can be ignored in the fundamental frequency. In
addition, the ﬁlter capacitor C can be ignored because of its neg-
ligible value in the fundamental frequency. For the multi-loop
droop control, because it regulates the magnitude and angular
frequency of the ﬁlter capacitor voltagevo, the equivalent circuit
in the fundamental frequency can be represented by a voltage
source behind impedance XL2. The cascaded inner voltage and
current loops, the inverter side inductor L1 and ﬁlter capacitor
C, and the PWM control can be ignored in the fundamental
frequency. The work in [33] pointed out the above difference
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 09:22:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 4 =====
DU et al.: POSITIVE-SEQUENCE MODELING OF DROOP-CONTROLLED GRID-FORMING INVERTERS FOR TRANSIENT STABILITY SIMULA TION 1739
TABLE I
ELECTRICAL AND CONTROL VARIABLES OF GRID-FORMING INVERTERS
TABLE II
CONTROLLER PARAMETERS OF THE TWO GFM DROOP CONTROLS
Fig. 3. Power Limiting. (a) Active power limiting. (b) Reactive power limiting.
between the two controls and compared their small signal per-
formances using detailed EMT models.
B. Active and Reactive Power Limiting
When connecting a GFM to the bulk power system, power
limiting controls are needed to prevent the output P and Q from
exceeding the limits under disturbances like loss of generation
units and the step change in voltage. Fig. 3 shows the active and
reactive power limiting control blocks.
A ss h o w ni nF i g .3(a), when Pf exceeds Pmax or drops below
Pmin, the anti-windup proportional-integral (PI) controller is
activated to limit Pf by changing the inverter output angular
frequencyω. This control was proposed by the Consortium for
Electric Reliability Technology Solutions (CERTS) Microgrid
project and tested in the ﬁeld [2], [11]. Similarly, as shown
in Fig. 3(b), once Qf exceeds Qmax or drops below Qmin,t h e
reactive power limiting is activated to limit Qf by changing the
inverter output voltage[35]. The active power and reactive power
limiting controls can be added either on the direct droop control
or on the multi-loop droop control.
C. Current Limiting During Faults
Because a GFM approximately behaves as a voltage source
behind impedance during normal operations, during a severe
short-circuit fault it can generate high currents with the pos-
sibility of damaging the inverter hardware. Therefore, current
limiting controls are needed to prevent GFMs from overcurrent
during faults. Considering the characteristic of insulated-gate
bipolar transistors (IGBTs), the overcurrent needs to be limited
rapidly, typically within 1 ms as reported by the inverter man-
ufacturer [36]. This subsection introduces two current limiting
controls that are typically used by the direct droop and multi-loop
droop controls.
For the direct droop control, since it does not have an inner
current loop, the current limiting is implemented at the PWM
control layer. The typical approach is to block the associated
IGBTs once detecting the overcurrent, and then release the
blocking signal once the current drops below the threshold Imax
using a hysteresis loop. Fig. 4 shows the current limiting control
block for phase A. Once the output current ila exceeds Imax,
the hysteresis loop sends the blocking signal blka to IGBT 1
and IGBT 4 of the phase A bridge, where g1 and g4 are the
original gate signals generated by the PWM control, and g’1
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 09:22:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 5 =====
1740 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER DELIVERY, VOL. 39, NO. 3, JUNE 2024
Fig. 4. Current limiting used by the direct droop control.
Fig. 5. Inner voltage and current loops of the multi-loop droop control.
and g’4 are the new gate signals modulated by the blocking
signal blka. The currents on phase B and C can be limited in the
same manner. This approach was brieﬂy mentioned in [36], and
explained in detail in [37]. The advantage of this approach is
that it can limit the overcurrent very quickly, for example within
1–2 PWM cycles. However, this approach results in a ﬂat-topped
current waveform during faults, which is shown in Section V.
For the multi-loop droop control, since it has an inner current
loop, the overcurrent can be limited by saturating the current
references. Fig. 5 shows the cascaded inner voltage and current
loops together with the current limiting block.
The current limiting algorithm used in this paper is shown
in (5). If the magnitude of the current reference exceeds Imax,
both current referencesi∗lds andi∗lqs are reduced proportionally
according to (5). This assures that the magnitude of the current
is limited at Imax during the fault. Such method is called circular
current limiting control according to[38]. It should be noted that
when using this approach, the saturation limits of the voltage
loop need to be carefully designed to avoid windup when the
output current is saturated [10].
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
i∗
lds = i∗
ld,i∗
lqs = i∗
lq if
√
i∗
ld
2 +i∗
lq
2 ≤Imax
i∗
lds = i∗
ld Imax√
i∗
ld
2 +i∗
lq
2 ,i∗
lqs =
i∗
lq Imax
√
i∗
ld
2 +i∗
lq
2 if
√
i∗
ld
2 +i∗
lq
2>I max
(5)
Compared to the current limiting method used by the direct
droop control, this approach does not result in the distortion of
current waveforms under balanced faults. However, its response
speed is constrained by the bandwidth of the current loop, so
it is not as fast as the approach shown in Fig. 4. In addition,
this approach also results in distorted current waveforms under
unbalanced faults.
It is important to note that although the two current limiting
controls described earlier can effectively limit the overcurrent
during faults, they only work for short-term faults that are
quickly cleared by the power system protection devices (e.g.,
a 0.1 s fault). If the fault lasts too long, these two methods can
result in the loss of synchronism to the grid after the fault, as
reported in [14], [16].
Fig. 6. GFM representation. (a) V oltage phasor behind impedance represen-
tation. (b) Norton equivalent circuit.
IV . POSITIVE-SEQUENCE MODELING
After describing detailed EMT models of the two types of
GFM droop controls, this section introduces how to develop
the equivalent positive-sequence model to represent them in
the phasor domain. The positive-sequence modeling is based
on the phasor assumption and ignores the network dynamics.
In addition, the positive-sequence simulation typically runs at a
time step of a quarter of a cycle (e.g., 4.1667 ms for a 60 Hz
power system), which is much larger than the time step used by
EMT simulations. Therefore, appropriate simpliﬁcations must
be made to model GFMs in the positive-sequence tool.
A. V oltage Phasor Behind Impedance Representation
According to the explanation in Section III-A,aG F M
can be represented by a voltage phasor EGFM/2220δGFM be-
hind impedance XL in the positive-sequence tool, as shown in
Fig. 6(a), and the GFM controller changes the voltage magnitude
and phase angle of the voltage phasor. The dynamic of ﬁlter
inductance is ignored and is represented by an algebraic term
“jXL” instead of a differential term. This is signiﬁcantly different
from how a traditional grid-following inverter is modeled in
positive-sequence tools. As a grid-following inverter is typically
modeled as a controllable current phasor, and the controller
changes the active and reactive current references [39].
It is important to note that the value of XL is different when
representing the two different GFM droop controls described
in Section III. When representing the direct droop control, the
voltage phasor EGFM/2220δGFM refers to the inverter bridge side
voltage E/2220δE, and the reactance XL is the summation of the
inverter bridge side ﬁlter reactance XL1 and grid side ﬁlter
reactance XL2, as expressed in (6) and (7). The ﬁlter capacitor C
can be ignored because its value in the fundamental frequency
is typically very small.
EGF M ∠δGF M = E∠δE (6)
XL = XL1 +XL2 (7)
When representing the multi-loop droop control, the volt-
age phasor EGFM/2220δGFM refers to the ﬁlter capacitor voltage
Vo/2220δo, and XL refers to the inverter grid side ﬁlter reactance
XL2 only, as expressed in(8) and (9). The cascaded inner voltage
and current loops together with the inverter bridge side inductor
L1 and ﬁlter capacitor C are ignored in the phasor domain. As
explained in Section III-A, the bandwidths of the inner voltage
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 09:22:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 6 =====
DU et al.: POSITIVE-SEQUENCE MODELING OF DROOP-CONTROLLED GRID-FORMING INVERTERS FOR TRANSIENT STABILITY SIMULA TION 1741
Fig. 7. Overall control scheme. (a) P-f droop and active power limiting.
(b) Q-V droop and reactive power limiting.
and current loops are at least in the order of a few hundred Hz,
so it is reasonable to assume those inner loops track ideally in
the positive-sequence tool and ignore their dynamics.
EGF M ∠δGF M = Vo∠δo (8)
XL = XL2 (9)
B. Droop Control and Power Limiting Modeling
In the positive sequence tool, the low-pass ﬁlter, P-f and
Q-V droop control, and active and reactive power limiting of
GFMs can be modeled as the same as modeled in the EMT
simulation tool. This is because the bandwidths of those control
loops are relatively low, so that they can be modeled in the
phasor domain without causing numerical stability issues. Fig.7
shows the overall control scheme. Detailed control blocks were
shown in Figs. 2 and 3, and explained in Section III.I nF i g .7(a)
and (b),δdroop and Edroop are the static phase angle and voltage
magnitude obtained from the control blocks. Note that in the
positive-sequence tool, the static phase angle δdroop should be
used by the network solver instead of the rotating phase angle
θ. By comparing Figs. 2(b) and 7(a), it can be seen that θ=
δdroop+ω0t. Assuming the GFM output frequency is 60 Hz, then
δdroop is a ﬁxed value whileθchanges from 0 to 2πperiodically.
C. Fault Current Limiting Modeling
Neither the PWM blocking method, nor the circular current
limiting method described in Section III-C can be directly
modeled in the positive-sequence tool because of their high
bandwidths. Therefore, an equivalent modeling method must
be developed to accurately represent their control effect and
at the same time allows a larger simulation time step for the
positive-sequence simulation. Since the current limiting control
typically responds very fast, it is reasonable ignore its dynamics
and model it algebraically in the positive-sequence tool. The
work in [38] pointed out that the circular current limiting control
used by the multi-loop droop-controlled GFMs as described in
(5) is equivalent to a virtual resistor. Similarly, simulation studies
Fig. 8. Equivalent circuit of the GFM in the current limiting mode.
Fig. 9. Flow chart of the current limiting algorithm developed for positive-
sequence simulation tools.
show that the control effect of PWM blocking method used
by the direct-droop-controlled GFMs as described in Fig. 4 is
also like a virtual resistor. Therefore, those two current limiting
controls described in Section III-C can be equivalently modeled
as a virtual resistor Re in the positive-sequence tool, as shown
in Fig. 8.
The function of the virtual resistorRe is to limit the magnitude
of output current at Imax during a fault as described in (10), and
its value can be calculated using (11).
⏐⏐⏐⏐
Edroop ∠δdroop −Vt∠δt
Re +jXL
⏐⏐⏐⏐ = Imax (10)
Re =
√
E2droop +V 2t −2EdroopVt cos(δdroop −δt)
I2max
−XL
2
(11)
The ﬂow chart in Fig. 9 describes the virtual-resistor-based
current limiting algorithm developed for the positive-sequence
model. Equations (12) and (13) are used as a criterion to de-
termine if the GFM will go into the current limiting or not. At
each simulation time step, the GFM output current phasor I/2220ϕ
is calculated using (12). If the current magnitude I is smaller
than Imax, then the GFM will not go into the current limiting
mode, and EGFM and δGFM are governed by the P-f and Q-V
droop controls, as shown in (13-a). Once I exceed Imax caused
by a fault, for exampleVt drops to 0 pu, the GFM will go into the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 09:22:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 7 =====
1742 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER DELIVERY, VOL. 39, NO. 3, JUNE 2024
Fig. 10. Flow chart describing the interaction between the grid-forming in-
verter model and the network solver.
current limiting mode and the voltage phasor EGFM/2220δGFM is
calculated using (13-b). In the current limiting mode, the GFM
output current phasor Imax/2220ϕLim is dependent on the virtual
resistor Re, as shown in Fig. 9. Equation (13-b) assures that the
magnitude of the GFM output current is limited at Imax in the
current limiting mode.
I∠ϕ= Edroop ∠δdroop −Vt∠δt
jXL
(12)
⎧
⎨
⎩
EGF M ∠δGF M =Edroop ∠δdroop,if I<I max (13-a)
EGF M ∠δGF M =Vt∠δt +jXLImax∠ϕLim,
if I ≥Imax (13-b)
D. Interface With the Network Solver
The ﬂow chart in Fig. 10 describes how the developed
positive-sequence GFM model interacts with the network solver.
At each simulation time step, theP-f and Q-V droop controls as
shown in Fig. 7 ﬁrst generate the voltage phasor Edroop/2220δdroop
based on the P and Q returned by the network solver, and
then the current limiting algorithm shown in Fig. 9 checks
if the inverter output current exceeds Imax or not and deter-
mines the actual inverter internal voltage phasor EGFM/2220δGFM.
Because most positive-sequence tools used in the United States
use the current-injection-based methods to solve the network
equations, the voltage phasor EGFM/2220δGFM behind impedance
XL shown in Fig. 6(a) is converted to its Norton equivalent
circuit, as shown in Fig. 6(b),u s i n g(14) and (15). Once the
current phasor IN/2220ϕN and admittance YL are obtained, they
are sent to the network solver to solve the network algebraic
equations for the next simulation time step.
IN ∠ϕN = EGF M ∠δGF M
jXL
(14)
Fig. 11. Single-GFM inﬁnite-bus system.
TABLE III
VALUES OF L1, L2, AND EQUIV ALENTXL
YL = 1
XL
(15)
V. C OMPARISON IN A SINGLE-GFM INFINITE-BUS SYSTEM
To investigate how accurately the developed positive-
sequence model can represent the two GFM droop controls,
a rigorous comparison between EMT and positive-sequence
simulations was performed on a single-GFM inﬁnite bus system
as shown in Fig. 11. The EMT models of the two GFM con-
trols were developed in the PSCAD simulation tool [40].T h e
IGBT-based model was used to represent the inverter in PSCAD,
and the PWM switching frequency was set at 10 kHz. The
positive-sequence model was developed in the commercially
available positive-sequence simulation tool PSS/E. The time
step for the PSCAD simulation was 5 μs, and the time step
for the PSS/E simulation was 4.167 ms.
Table II shows the controller parameters of the direct droop
control and the multi-loop droop control. The parameters of the
low-pass ﬁlter, P-f and Q-V droop, and power limiting are the
same for both GFM controls. The line impedance is Rg + jXg =
0.02 + j0.15 pu. According to Fig. 2(c) and (d), if the values
of L1 and L2 remain the same when using two GFM droop
controls, they will have different values ofXL in the fundamental
frequency, resulting in different simulation results. Therefore,
to achieve a reasonable comparison, the values of L1 and L2
were designed to assure that the two GFM controls have the
same value of XL in the fundamental frequency, as listed in
Table III. The ﬁlter capacitor C was designed to have a cutoff
frequency of 600 Hz. With the values of XL and other major
parameters remaining the same, it is expected that the direct
droop control and the multi-loop droop control will have similar
dynamic performances.
A. Step Change in V oltage Magnitude
In this scenario, the magnitude of grid voltage Vg dropped to
0.8 pu at 1.2 s, resulting in the GFM terminal voltage Vt to drop
to 0.86 pu.
Because the internal voltage magnitude Edroop still held ap-
proximately constant, the voltage difference betweenEdroop and
Vt resulted in a sudden increase in Q. Once Q reached the limit
Qmax, the reactive power limiting control shown in Fig.3(b) was
activated to limit Q at 0.44 pu by reducing Edroop. The system
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 09:22:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 8 =====
DU et al.: POSITIVE-SEQUENCE MODELING OF DROOP-CONTROLLED GRID-FORMING INVERTERS FOR TRANSIENT STABILITY SIMULA TION 1743
Fig. 12. GFM response to a step change in the grid voltage magnitude.
(a) EMT simulations of two GFM controls. (b) Positive-sequence simulation.
reached a steady state after about 0.1 s. The output frequency of
the GFM deviated from 60 Hz during the transient because of
the slight change in P, and it returned to 60 Hz in the steady state
because the grid frequency was ﬁxed at 60 Hz. Fig.12(a) and (b)
show the EMT and positive-sequence simulation results. Note
that in the EMT simulation, there were some fast oscillations in
the output P, Q, and f of the GFM in the ﬁrst 0.06 s after the
disturbance. Because the positive-sequence simulation approach
ignores the dynamics of the network and inverter ﬁlter inductor,
it cannot capture those fast oscillations as the EMT simulation
does. However, the positive-sequence simulation results overall
aligned well with the EMT simulation results in the studied 0.5 s
time frame.
B. Typical Fault
In this scenario, a 0.1 s bolted fault was applied at the terminal
of the GFM. As shown in Fig.13, because the terminal voltageVt
dropped to 0, the GFM outputP and Q became 0 during the fault.
After the fault was cleared, the system remained stable. Fig. 14
shows the GFM output current Io and the phase angle from the
P-f droop control δdroop. During the fault, the output current
was immediately limited at 2 pu. For the EMT simulations, this
is because the inner current limiting controls respond very fast,
so the dynamics are invisible in the selected time frame. For the
positive-sequence simulation, this is because the current limiting
is implemented algebraically, so its dynamics are ignored. The
inverter output currents from the EMT simulations were slightly
higher than 2 pu. This is because the output current in Fig. 14
refers to the grid side current so that the ﬁlter capacitor has a
contribution to it. Fig. 15 shows the inverter bridge side current
waveforms obtained from the EMT simulations. For the direct
droop control, the inverter output currents were limited at 2 pu,
but the waveforms were distorted due to the current limiting
control algorithm. This distortion also resulted in a slightly
Fig. 13. GFM response to a 0.1 s bolted fault. (a) EMT simulations of two
GFM controls. (b) Positive-sequence simulation.
Fig. 14. GFM output current and phase angle during the 0.1 s bolted fault.
(a) EMT simulations of two GFM controls. (b) Positive-sequence simulation.
Fig. 15. EMT simulations of the GFM bridge side current waveform during
the 0.1 s bolted fault. (a) Direct droop control. (b) Multi-loop droop control.
higher root-mean square value of the current, as shown in Fig.14.
For the multi-loop droop control, the currents were limited at 2
pu without distortions, but there was a slight overshoot in the
ﬁrst cycle during the fault. The phase angle δdroop increased
during the fault according to the P-f droop control and returned
to the pre-fault value after the fault was cleared. Both the EMT
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 09:22:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 9 =====
1744 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER DELIVERY, VOL. 39, NO. 3, JUNE 2024
Fig. 16. GFM response to a delayed clearing fault. (a) EMT simulations of
two GFM controls. (b) Positive-sequence simulation.
Fig. 17. GFM output current and phase angle during the delayed clearing fault.
(a) EMT simulations of two GFM controls. (b) Positive-sequence simulation.
simulations and the positive-sequence simulation reﬂected the
change of the phase angle.
Note that for the positive-sequence simulation, the P, Q, and
Vt shown in the simulation results were returned by the network
solver. They were not the outputs of the low-pass ﬁlters. There-
fore, they had a “step change” response during the disturbance.
In contrast, for the EMT simulations, the P, Q, and Vt shown
in the simulation results were passed through low-pass ﬁlters to
ﬁlter out high-frequency noises. Therefore, they did not have the
“step change” response during the disturbance.
C. Delayed Clearing Fault
Figs. 16 and 17 show the responses of the GFM to a 0.45 s
delayed clearing fault. Because the fault lasted a longer duration,
the phase angle δdroop lost synchronism to the grid and could
not return to the pre-fault value. Although δdroop stabilized at
another value after the fault was cleared, as shown in Fig.17,t h e
system experienced large transients onP, Q, Vt, and f during and
Fig. 18. Modiﬁed IEEE 39-bus system with 5 GFMs.
after the fault as shown in Fig. 16. Such large transients can trig-
ger the inverter internal protections in a real system. Therefore,
the current limiting controls described in this paper cannot help
the GFM survive such severe faults. The loss of synchronism
phenomenon caused by similar current limiting algorithms has
been explained previously in references [14], [16].F i g s .16(b)
and 17(b) show that such phenomenon can also be captured
by the positive-sequence model. Note that many innovative
controls are currently being proposed to help GFMs survive such
large disturbances. However, developing new fault ride-through
controls of GFMs is not the focus of this paper. After the fault was
cleared, the output current Io experienced some transients in the
EMT simulations but not in the positive-sequence simulation.
Again, this is because the ﬁlter capacitor exists in the EMT
models but not in the positive-sequence model.
VI. C OMPARISON IN A MODIFIED IEEE 39-BUS SYSTEM
To further validate the positive-sequence model in a bulk
power system environment, a rigorous comparison between
EMT and positive-sequence simulations was performed on a
modiﬁed IEEE 39-Bus System.
As shown in Fig. 18, ﬁve out of ten synchronous machines
were replaced with GFMs, out of which three of them used the
direct droop control and the other two used the multi-loop droop
control. The parameters of the GFMs were the same as those
described in Section V, except for that Pmax was changed to
1 pu and Qmax and Qmin were changed to 0.6 pu and -0.6 pu for
each GFM to ensure a ﬂat initialization of the positive-sequence
simulation. The time steps used in the simulations are the same
as used in Section V.
A. Fault-Induced Loss of Generation Event
In this scenario, a three-phase bolted fault was applied at Bus
19 which is close to Synchronous Machine 33, and the fault
was cleared after 0.1 s. Because of the substantial voltage drop,
Synchronous Machine 33 tripped off after the fault. Fig. 19(a)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 09:22:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 10 =====
DU et al.: POSITIVE-SEQUENCE MODELING OF DROOP-CONTROLLED GRID-FORMING INVERTERS FOR TRANSIENT STABILITY SIMULA TION 1745
Fig. 19. Comparision of EMT and positive-sequence simulation results for
the modiﬁed IEEE 39-bus system. (a) Responses of GFM 34. (b) Responses of
GFM 30.
TABLE IV
COMPUTA TIONALTIME (SIMULA TIONRUNTIME:2 0 S)
and (b) show the comparison of EMT and positive-sequence
simulation results for GFM 34 and GFM 30, respectively. The
GFM 34 uses the direct droop control and GFM 30 uses the
multi-loop droop control. Because GFM 34 was close to the
fault location, its terminal voltage V dropped to 0.37 pu during
the fault, resulting in the output current Io reaching the limit
Imax = 2 pu, as shown in Fig. 19(a). The GFM 34 quickly
exited the current limiting mode after the fault was cleared. As
for GFM 30, because it was far away from the fault location,
its terminal voltage V only dropped to 0.8 pu and the output
current Io did not reach the limit Imax during the fault. Despite
that some fast electromagnetic transients were not captured by
the positive-sequence models, the positive-sequence simulation
results aligned very well with the EMT simulation results, as
shown in Fig. 19(a) and (b).
The EMT and positive-sequence simulations for each GFM
and synchronous machine were compared, and all comparisons
achieved the same level of alignment as shown in Fig. 19 .
B. Computational Time Summary
TableIV summarizes the computational times. The simulation
runtime was 20 s. Because ﬁve IGBT-based GFM models were
Fig. 20. Simulation results of the Western Interconnection system.
(a) Case 1: The original case. (b) Case 2: All synchronous machines repalced
by GFMs.
used and simulated at a time step of 5 μs, it took 18634 s to
complete the EMT simulation. In contrast, it only took 0.2 s
to complete the positive-sequence simulation, which shows the
advantage of using positive-sequence simulations to study the
transient stability of transmission systems. Note that this paper
aims to achieve a very rigorous comparison between EMT and
positive-sequence simulations so that the IGBT-based EMT
models were used. The computational time of EMT simulations
is expected to be signiﬁcantly reduced by using simpliﬁed mod-
els such as switching function models. However, such studies
are out of the scope of this paper.
VII. S TUDY IN THE WESTERN INTERCONNECTION SYSTEM
With rigorous model validations performed in Sections V
and VI, the positive-sequence GFM model was ﬁnally studied
in the U.S. Western Interconnection system in this section.
The system model includes 22,000 + buses, 5,000 + syn-
chronous machines, and 1000 + grid-following inverters. The
2021 Heavy Summer case was selected, and the total load was
around 150000 MW. Because of its size, it would be extremely
difﬁcult to conduct an EMT simulation for such a large system.
Therefore, only positive-sequence simulations were performed.
A Paciﬁc DC Intertie (PDCI) bi-pole outage was selected as
the contingency to examine the system transient stability. Two
cases were simulated. The ﬁrst case simulated the original
system, where synchronous machines dominated the grid. For
the second case, all the synchronous machines were replaced by
GFMs, creating a 100% inverter case with high penetrations of
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 09:22:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 11 =====
1746 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER DELIVERY, VOL. 39, NO. 3, JUNE 2024
GFMs. Simulations were performed in PSS/E with a time step
of 4.167 ms, and the simulation runtime was 35 s. 25 generation
units across the system were monitored. It took around 12.3
minutes to complete Case 1, and around 18.3 minutes to com-
plete Case 2. Fig. 20(a) and (b) present the simulation results of
the 25 generations units for the two cases. By comparing these
results, it becomes evident that replacing all synchronous ma-
chines with GFMs signiﬁcantly improves the system damping.
This case study shows that a) the developed positive-sequence
GFM model is numerically stable in a practical bulk power
system environment, and b) the high penetration of GFMs can
signiﬁcantly enhance the system damping compared to tradi-
tional synchronous machine-dominated systems. Future work
will explore additional scenarios with varying levels of GFM
penetration based on the developed the GFM model.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
As GFMs are being rapidly connected to the power grids
around the world, it is important to understand how GFMs should
be modeled in conventional positive-sequence simulation tools
for studying their impacts on the transient stability of large-scale
transmission systems. This paper describes a positive-sequence
model to represent to two widely reported droop-controlled
GFMs. Methods of how to develop the equivalent voltage source
behind impedance to represent inverters with and without inner
control loops, modeling of P-f and Q-V droop controls, active
and reactive power limiting modeling, and modeling of fault
current limiting controls have been described in detail. The
positive-sequence model was compared against detailed EMT
models in both a single-GFM inﬁnite-bus system and a modiﬁed
IEEE 39-bus system. Finally, the model has been tested on the
U.S. Western Interconnection system. The study results show
that the model has a good level of accuracy compared to the
detailed EMT models, and at the same time also achieves a
high computational efﬁciency, making it suitable for large-scale
transmission system simulation studies. Most parts of the model
described in the paper have been included in a generic library
positive-sequence grid-forming inverter model, REGFM_A1,
which was recently adopted by the US WECC and included
in the model libraries of major commercial positive-sequence
simulation tools, including PTI-PSSE, GE-PSLF, PowerWorld
Simulator, and TSA T, marking the ﬁrst publicly available grid-
forming inverter model that is included in all major commercial
transient stability simulation tools used in North America.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The views expressed herein do not necessarily represent the
views of the U.S. Department of Energy or the United States
Government.
REFERENCES
[1] R. H. Lasseter, Z. Chen, and D. Pattabiraman, “Grid-forming inverters:
A critical asset for the power grid,” IEEE J. Emerg. Sel. Topics Power
Electron., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 925–935, Jun. 2020.
[2] R. H. Lasseter et al., “CERTS microgrid laboratory test bed,” IEEE Trans.
Power Del., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 325–332, Jan. 2011.
[3] J. Matevosyan et al., “Grid-forming inverters: Are they the key for high re-
newable penetration?,”IEEE Power Energy Mag., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 89–98,
Nov./Dec. 2019.
[4] M. E. Elkhatib, W. Du, and R. H. Lasseter, “Evaluation of inverter-
based grid frequency support using frequency-watt and grid-forming
PV inverters,” in Proc. IEEE Power Energy Soc. Gen. Meeting , 2018,
pp. 1–5.
[5] A. Crivellaro et al., “Beyond low-inertia systems: Massive integration of
grid-forming power converters in transmission grids,” inProc. IEEE Power
Energy Soc. Gen. Meeting , 2020, pp. 1–5.
[6] W. Du et al., “Modeling of grid-forming and grid-following inverters
for dynamic simulation of large-scale distribution systems,” IEEE Trans.
Power Del., vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 2035–2045, Aug. 2021.
[7] P . F. Mayer, M. Gordon, W. C. Huang, and C. Hardt, “Improving grid
strength in a wide-area transmission system with grid forming inverters,”
Inst. Eng. Technol. Gener ., Transmiss. Distrib., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 399–410,
2023.
[8] D. Pattabiraman, R. H. Lasseter, and T. M. Jahns, “Comparison of
grid following and grid forming control for a high inverter penetration
power system,” in Proc. IEEE Power Energy Soc. Gen. Meeting , 2018,
pp. 1–5.
[9] P . Brogan, T. Knueppel, D. Elliott, and N. Goldenbaum, “Experience of
grid forming power converter control,” in Proc. 17th Wind Integration
Workshop, 2018.
[10] H. N. V . Pico and V . Gevorgian, “Blackstart capability and survivability of
wind turbines with fully rated converters,” IEEE Trans. Energy Convers.,
vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 2482–2497, Dec. 2022.
[11] W. Du, R. H. Lasseter, and A. S. Khalsa, “Survivability of autonomous
microgrid during overload events,”IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 4,
pp. 3515–3524, Jul. 2019.
[12] O. Schomann, “Experiences with large grid-forming inverters on various
island and microgrid projects,” in Proc. Hybrid Power Syst. Workshop ,
2019.
[13] A. Roscoe et al., “Practical experience of providing enhanced grid forming
services from an onshore wind park,” in Proc. 19th Wind Integration
Workshop, 2020, pp. 1–4.
[14] L. Huang, H. Xin, Z. Wang, L. Zhang, K. Wu, and J. Hu, “Transient stability
analysis and control design of droop-controlled voltage source converters
considering current limitation,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid , vol. 10, no. 1,
pp. 578–591, Jan. 2019.
[15] T. Qoria, F. Gruson, F. Colas, G. Denis, T. Prevost, and X. Guillaud,
“Critical clearing time determination and enhancement of grid-forming
converters embedding virtual impedance as current limitation algorithm,”
IEEE J. Emerg. Sel. Topics Power Electron., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1050–1061,
Jun. 2020.
[16] E. Rokrok, T. Qoria, A. Bruyere, B. Francois, and X. Guillaud, “Transient
stability assessment and enhancement of grid-forming converters embed-
ding current reference saturation as current limiting strategy,”IEEE Trans.
Power Syst., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 1519–1531, Mar. 2022.
[17] N. Baeckeland, D. V enkatramanan, M. Kleemann, and S. Dhople,
“Stationary-frame grid-forming inverter control architectures for unbal-
anced fault-current limiting,” IEEE Trans. Energy Convers., vol. 37, no. 4,
pp. 2813–2825, Dec. 2022.
[18] Z. Jin and X. Wang, “A DQ-frame asymmetrical virtual impedance control
for enhancing transient stability of grid-forming inverters,” IEEE Trans.
Power Electron., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 4535–4544, Apr. 2022.
[19] P . J. Hart, M. Gong, H. Liu, Z. Chen, Y . Zhang, and Y . Wang, “Provably-
stable overload ride-through control for grid-forming inverters using
system-wide Lyapunov function analysis,” IEEE Trans. Energy Convers.,
vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 2761–2776, Dec. 2022.
[20] D. Ramasubramanian, Z. Y u, R. Ayyanar, V . Vittal, and J. Undrill, “Con-
verter model for representing converter interfaced generation in large scale
grid simulations,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 765–773,
Jan. 2017.
[21] V . A. Lacerda, E. P . Araujo, M. Cheah-Mañe, and O. Gomis-Bellmunt,
“Phasor modeling approaches and simulation guidelines of voltage-
source converters in grid-integration studies,” IEEE Access , vol. 10,
pp. 51826–51838, 2022.
[22] W. Du, Y . Liu, R. Huang, F. K. Tuffner, J. Xie, and Z. Huang, “Positive-
sequence phasor modeling of droop-controlled, grid-forming inverters
with fault current limiting function,” in Proc. IEEE Power Energy Soc.
Innov. Smart Grid Technol. Conf., 2022, pp. 1–5.
[23] S. Roy and H. N. V . Pico, “Transient stability and active protection of
power systems with grid-forming PV power plants,” IEEE Trans. Power
Syst., vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 897–911, Jan. 2023.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 09:22:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 12 =====
DU et al.: POSITIVE-SEQUENCE MODELING OF DROOP-CONTROLLED GRID-FORMING INVERTERS FOR TRANSIENT STABILITY SIMULA TION 1747
[24] D. Pattabiraman, R. H. Lasseter, and T. M. Jahns, “Transient stability
modeling of droop-controlled grid-forming inverters with fault current
limiting,” in Proc. IEEE Power Energy Soc. Gen. Meeting, 2020, pp. 1–5,
doi: 10.1109/PESGM41954.2020.9281712.
[25] Y . Gu, N. Bottrell, and T. C. Green, “Reduced-order models for represent-
ing converters in power system studies,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. ,
vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 3644–3654, Apr. 2018.
[26] B. Mahamedi and J. E. Fletcher, “The equivalent models of grid-forming
inverters in the sequence domain for the steady-state analysis of power sys-
tems,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 2876–2887, Jul. 2020.
[27] W. Du, “Model speciﬁcation of droop-controlled, grid-forming invert-
ers (REGFM_A1),” Paciﬁc Northwest Nat. Lab., Richland, W A, USA,
Tech. Rep. PNNL-35110, 2023.
[28] Siemens, PSS/E Software, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://new.
siemens.com/global/en/products/energy/energy-automation-and-smart-
grid/pss-software/pss-e.html
[29] GE Energy Consulting, PSLF Software, 2022. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.geenergyconsulting.com/practice-area/software-products/pslf
[30] PowerWorld Corporation, “PowerWorld software,” 2022. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.powerworld.com/
[31] Powertech Labs Inc., TSA T Software, 2022. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.dsatools.com/tsat/
[32] M. C. Chandorkar, D. M. Divan, and R. Adapa, “Control of parallel
connected inverters in stand-alone AC supply systems,” in Proc. IEEE
Ind. Appl. Soc. Annu. Meeting , 1991, pp. 1003–1009.
[33] W. Du et al., “A comparative study of two widely used grid-forming droop
controls on microgrid small-signal stability,” IEEE J. Emerg. Sel. Topics
Power Electron., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 963–975, Jun. 2020.
[34] N. Pogaku, M. Prodanovic, and T. C. Green, “Modeling, analysis and
testing of autonomous operation of an inverter-based microgrid,” IEEE
Trans. Power Electron., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 613–625, Mar. 2007.
[35] A. Knobloch et al., “Synchronous energy storage system with inertia
capabilities for angle, voltage and frequency stabilization in power grids,”
in Proc. 11th Sol. Storage Power Syst. Integration Workshop , 2021,
pp. 71–78.
[36] D. Duckwitz, A. Knobloch, F. Welck, T. Becker, C. Gloeckler, and T.
Buelo, “Experimental short-circuit testing of grid-forming inverters in
microgrid and interconnected mode,” in Proc. IEEE NEIS Conf. Sustain.
Energy Supply Energy Storage Syst., 2018, pp. 1–6.
[37] W. Du, Q. Nguyen, Y . Liu, and S. M. Mohiuddin, “A current limiting
control strategy for single-loop droop-controlled grid-forming inverters
under balanced and unbalanced faults,” in Proc. IEEE Energy Convers.
Congr . Expo., 2022, pp. 1–7.
[38] B. Fan and X. Wang, “Equivalent circuit model of grid-forming converters
with circular current limiter for transient stability analysis,” IEEE Trans.
Power Syst., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 3141–3144, Jul. 2022, doi: 10.1109/TP-
WRS.2022.3173160.
[39] P . Pourbeik et al., “Generic dynamic models for modeling wind power
plants and other renewable technologies in large-scale power system
studies,” IEEE Trans. Energy Convers. , vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 1108–1116,
Sep. 2017, doi: 10.1109/TEC.2016.2639050.
[40] Manitoba HVDC Research Centre, PSCAD Software, 2019. [Online].
Available: https://hvdc.ca/pscad/
Wei Du (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in electrical engineering from Tsinghua Uni-
versity, Beijing, China, in 2014. He is currently a Staff
Research Engineer with Paciﬁc Northwest National
Laboratory, Richland, W A, USA. He was a Visiting
Student with the University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI, USA, from 2012 to 2013, where he was
also a Postdoctoral Researcher from 2016 to 2018.
From 2014 to 2016, he was a Research Engineer
with the Key Real Time Digital Simulation Lab of
Power System, China Southern Power Grid Company,
Guangzhou, China. His main research interests include control design, modeling,
and simulation of power systems with high penetration of power electronics. He
is the Principal Investigator of multiple projects funded by the U.S. Department
of Energy that investigate the impacts of inverter-based resources on the stability
of power systems. He is the Co-lead of the Modeling and Simulation Area of
the Universal Interoperability for Grid-Forming Inverters Consortium. He is the
Lead Developer of the ﬁrst generation of the US WECC generic grid-forming
inverter model, REGFM_A1. The REGFM_A1 model has been integrated
into major commercial transient stability simulation tools including Siemens
PTI-PSSE, GE-PSLF, PowerWorld Simulator, and TSA T for industry use.
Quan H. Nguyen (Member, IEEE) received the B.E.
degree in electrical engineering from the Hanoi Uni-
versity of Science and Technology, Hanoi, Vietnam,
in 2012, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical
engineering from The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, TX, USA, in 2016 and 2019, respectively.
Since 2019, he has been a Power System Engineer
with The Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory,
Richland, W A, USA. His research interests include
production cost modeling, control, optimization, and
simulation of power systems with high penetrations
of inverter-based resources, and ﬂexible HVDC and low-frequency transmission.
Song Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
master’s degree in electrical engineering from the
Shenyang University of Technology, Shenyang,
China. He has more than 30 years of experience in
transmission system planning, design, modeling, and
compliance. Since 2016, he has also been Chairman
with US Western Electricity Coordinating Council’s
Modeling and V alidation Subcommittee. He is cur-
rently the Senior Principal Engineer with Portland
General Electric, USA. He is also a Transmission
Planning Expert and provides consultation and rec-
ommendations to the Senior Management. He is an Adjunct Professor of power
system stability and power system I classes with Portland State University. He
also Leads the Review, Recommendation, Development, and V alidation of power
system models to support reliability assessments to advance the industry. He was
a Point of Contact for multiple DOE projects. He is the Principal Investigator
with US DOE Grid Services Demonstration Project, which aims to demonstrate
that grid-forming technologies enhance grid stability and promote the utility
adoption of grid-forming technologies.
Jinho Kim (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. de-
gree from Electrical Engineering Department, Jeon-
buk National University, Jeonju, South Korea, in
2018. During his Ph.D., he was an Assistant Re-
searcher with the Wind Energy Grid-Adaptive Tech-
nologies Research Center, Jeonju, supported by the
Ministry of Science, ICT, and Future Planning, South
Korea. From 2018 to 2022, he was a Research Fellow
with Electrical and Computer Engineering Depart-
ment, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, USA. He is
currently a power system research Engineer with
Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, W A, USA. His main research
interests include control coordination, modeling, and multi-time scale simulation
for power systems with high penetration levels of inverter-based resources. He
is currently engaged in multiple DOE-funded projects.
Yuan Liu (Member, IEEE) received the M.S. and
Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Arizona
State University, Tempe, AZ, USA, in 2012 and 2016,
respectively. He is currently a Staff Engineer with Pa-
ciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, W A,
USA. His research interests include renewable energy
integration, load modeling, and power system simu-
lation and control.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 09:22:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 13 =====
1748 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER DELIVERY, VOL. 39, NO. 3, JUNE 2024
Songzhe Zhu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Iowa
State University, Ames, IA, USA, in 2000. She is
currently a Senior Principal Consultant with Grid-
Bright, a Qualus Company, Alamo, CA, USA. She
was previously a Senior Advisor with California
ISO, Folsom, CA. She worked extensively in the
areas of generation interconnection and transmission
planning with California ISO. She has been actively
involved in NERC and WECC workgroups to develop
and enhance modeling of inverter-based resources.
Francis K. Tuffner(Senior Member, IEEE) received
the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the
University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY , USA, in 2008.
He is currently a Research Engineer with the Pa-
ciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, W A,
USA. His research interests include signal process-
ing applied to power systems, EV -Grid integration,
embedded control devices, microgrids for resilience,
and distribution level modeling.
Zhenyu Huang received the B.Eng. degree in elec-
trical engineering from the Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 1994,
and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 1999. He is
currently a Laboratory Fellow with Paciﬁc North-
west National Laboratory, Richland, W A, USA, and
holds a joint appointment of Research Professor with
Washington State University, Pullman, W A. He is also
a Policy Advisor on grid modernization for the US
Department of Energy (DOE)’s Undersecretary for
Science and Innovation. He was a Technical Advisor with the DOE EERE
Solar Energy Technologies Ofﬁce during 2019–2020. At PNNL, He is leading
the power electronics and renewable integration portfolios. He has more than
200 peer-reviewed publications. Prior to joining PNNL in 2003, he conducted
extensive research on power system stability and harmonics with the University
of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada,
and The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. His research interests include
high performance computing, data analytics, and optimization and control for
inverter- and renewable-dominant power and energy systems.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 09:22:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 